
Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy / 85 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in Youth Ministry (21 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Christian Ministry majors only) 

A minor in Youth Ministry will consist of Christian Ministries 112, 238, 258, 480 (3 
hours); Religion 217; and six additional hours from Christian Ministries 122, 228, 248, 313, 
321, 322, 361, 412, Religion 237, 238, 248, 255, or 320. 
 
Pre-Theological Concentration 
 Pre-theological students should plan their program with the help of the Chair of the 
Department of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

RELIGION (RELI) 
RELI 211. OLD TESTAMENT LITERATURE AND HISTORY. An introduction to the literature, 
content, and history of the Old Testament. Special attention is given to the historical background, 
composition, and theological message of the Old Testament. The course further acquaints students 
with the basic methods of Old Testament studies and the present state of Old Testament research. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 212. NEW TESTAMENT LITERATURE AND HISTORY. An introduction to the literature, 
content, and history of the New Testament. Special attention is given to the historical background, 
composition, and theological message of the New Testament. The course further acquaints students 
with the basic methods of New Testament studies and the present state of New Testament research. 
This course contains the second component of the general education Information Literacy (IL) 
requirement for students substituting Religion 211 and 212 for the Humanities 102 requirement.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 217. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. An introduction to the methods of systematic theology in 
terms of narrative, covenant and creed, and an examination of the central doctrines of historic 
Christianity, including Revelation and Scripture, the being and attributes of God, Humanity, the Person 
and Work of Christ, the Person and Work of the Holy Spirit, the Christian Life, the Church and the 
Sacraments, and the Last Things. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
RELI 218. INTERPRETING THE BIBLE. An introduction to the skills necessary for understanding 
a Biblical passage’s meaning in each Bible genre. Skills addressed will range from establishing the 
text, comparing translations and observing the text, to rules for proper interpretation, to applying the 
text to Christians today accurately. Advanced skills will also be taught, including mastering a Bible 
book, legitimately finding Christ in (even Old Testament) Biblical texts, typology, and dealing with 
difficult texts. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
RELI 220. CHRISTIANITY AND THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF LIFE. The course 
concerns some of the fundamental questions such as: What is a good person? What is a good life? 
What is a good society? What is/are the human problem(s)? How do we understand human nature? 
What is the Christian view of justice, right and wrong, good and evil? Not all of these questions will 
be addressed in every class. Answers to these questions will involve a study of the Christian tradition 
of politics, including the Bible and contemporary interpreters, although not all of these sources will be 
utilized in every class. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 221. THE LIFE OF CHRIST. This course aims to give the student a good understanding of 
the person, work, and teachings of Christ as presented in the Gospels. It also seeks to introduce the 
student to some of the important literature on the subject.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 



86 / Grove City College 

RELI 232. THE LIFE AND WORK OF PAUL. A study of the life and work of the apostle Paul, 
author of almost one-half of the New Testament. Attention is given to both the descriptive material in 
the book of Acts and the thematic material from the Pauline Epistles. Students are introduced to current 
issues in the study of Paul. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 235. BIBLICAL IDEAS. This course will draw together Biblical, systematic, and 
pastoral/practical theological styles and methods. In doing so, the class will expose students to some 
of the great concepts of the Bible such as the fear of the Lord, the call to care for the elderly, fasting, 
tithing and the Sabbath. Along with this, the class will equip students with basic Biblical studies skills 
needed for their own continuing theological reflection in the years to come. Prerequisites: One of 
Humanities 102 or Religion 211 and 212. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 237. OLD TESTAMENT BIBLICAL BOOKS. This course will examine the genre, themes, 
theology, and practical application of one Old Testament book. The Old Testament book studied will 
differ each semester. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 238. NEW TESTAMENT BIBLICAL BOOKS. This course will examine the genre, themes, 
theology, and practical application of one New Testament book. The New Testament book studied will 
differ each semester. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 246. CHRISTIAN EDUCATION FOR YOUTH AND ADULTS. This course intends to aid 
persons who plan to lead youth and adults in the Christian education environment. It will include a 
consideration of objectives; of historical, theological, and psychological background of methods and 
programming resources; and of techniques for outreach.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 247. CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN RELIGION. This course seeks to examine and 
explore the prominent place of religion in this religiously pluralistic nation by describing and analyzing 
current American religious developments in historical, sociological, and theological perspective. 
Institutional and non-institutional developments within and outside the Judeo-Christian tradition will 
also be examined. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 248. WORLD RELIGIONS. An introduction to the major living religions, to the leading 
problems of religious thought, and to the alternative approaches of world religions to ultimate questions 
concerning the meaning of human life. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 251. LEADERSHIP IN CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course concentrates on the 
leadership, organization and administration of the programs and activities of the local church and the 
many “parachurch” organizations. Sound principles or servant leadership are emphasized in a context 
of biblical teaching. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 253. PHILOSOPHY OF MINISTRY. Scripture, history, culture, and sociology play 
significant roles in the formulation of a philosophy of ministry. This course seeks to help the student 
understand how these factors affect the various fields of ministry.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 255. DEFENDING THE FAITH. This course will investigate evidential, presupposition, 
postmodern, and other approaches to apologetics. The emphasis will be on the epistemological stance 
one should take in apologetic encounters. A portion of this course will focus on responses to various 
objections and concerns that one is likely to face in apologetic encounters.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in religion. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy / 87 
 

RELI 261. C.S. LEWIS: CHRISTIAN APOLOGIST. A study of one of contemporary Christianity's 
greatest apologists. The primary subject of study is Lewis' unique contributions to apologetics 
including his epistemology, view of myth, and defense of supernaturalism. Various examples of Lewis' 
writings are examined from selected essays and theological articles and the Chronicles of Narnia.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
religion. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
RELI 290. STUDIES IN RELIGION. The subject matter for this course will vary each semester to 
allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of religion. The aim of such a course is in-depth 
study of some specific facet of religion with particular emphasis on the relationship of religion and 
contemporary life. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 317. THE DOCTRINE OF GOD. This course examines how the church formulated the 
classical, creedal doctrine of God, and how this was subsequently developed. Particular attention will 
be paid to primary texts and to the manner in which theology proper (the doctrine of God) also had 
implications both for Christology and for the way in which the church read the Bible.  It will also 
address the reasons why classical theism has been challenged in recent times, and will culminate in a 
discussion of the importance of the recovery of classical theism in the church today. Above all, the 
course’s watchword will be the notion lex credendi est lex orandi - the rule of believing is the rule of 
praising - and will seek to connect doctrine with praise. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 320. THEOLOGY OF MISSIONS. A survey of the greatest evangelistic and mission 
movements in history, the Biblical-theological basis for missions, and contemporary developments in 
mission strategy. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 325. BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF WORSHIP. This course will discuss the sacred places, 
people, offerings and festivals of the Old Testament and their relation to the New. The class traces the 
redemptive-historical development of forms of worship from the Garden of Eden to the exilic period 
and beyond into the New Testament. The focus of the course will be primarily exegetical, interacting 
with the Biblical materials rather than with historical-critical approaches. The goal of the course is to 
form a solid Biblical basis from which to address the issues of worship which face the contemporary 
church. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 330. THEOLOGY OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. This course examines writings on spiritual 
formation from an historical, theological, and Biblical perspective. Key topics include the holiness of 
God, the person and work of the Holy Spirit, prayer, Bible Study, and the discernment of God's will.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 341. CHRISTENDOM AND REFORM. A study of the history of Christianity from the time 
of Charlemagne until the end of the Religious Wars in 1648, this course will explore Christianity 
throughout the Medieval Period, as tensions and then schism arose between the Greek and Latin 
Churches, and then go into the Reformation era with its various callings for reform of the Western 
Church. Emphasis will be placed on important persons and ideas, movements of significance, and the 
relationship of the Christian mission to surrounding culture.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 345. LUTHER AND CALVIN. This course focuses on the Reformation leaders whose work 
and ideas shaped Protestantism. Primary sources will be used. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 351. HERMENEUTICS. A study of central issues of Biblical interpretation that bear directly 
on current concerns of human existence. This course examines the import and implications of the 
Biblical literature. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 



88 / Grove City College 

RELI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with previous 
background in religion to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. Prerequisites: Twelve 
hours of religion coursework, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor. 
 Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
RELI 362. CONTEMPORARY THEOLOGY. A study of major themes in contemporary theology 
including such topics as religious language, views of God, meaning of man and redemption, and the 
problem of evil. These topics are discussed as they relate to contemporary cultures and worldviews.
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
religion. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
RELI 390. ADVANCED STUDIES IN RELIGION. The subject matter for this course will vary 
each semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of religion. The aim of such 
courses is in-depth study of some specific facet of religion with particular emphasis on the relationship 
of religion and contemporary life. Semester course, three hours. 
 
RELI 450. CHRIST AND THE MEDIA. This course provides an historical survey and a Biblical-
Theistic interaction with how human media shape the social environment and structure human thought. 
Taught as a seminar, students read and discuss Plato, Ong, Postman, McLuhan, and others who have 
contributed to understanding of orality, literacy, image, and electronic media.   
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
RELI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with previous 
background in religion to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. Prerequisites: Twelve 
hours of religion coursework, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor. 
 Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
RELI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
religion. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
RELI 480. INTERNSHIP IN RELIGION. This course offers practical experience appropriate for 
the Christian Ministries auxiliary field. Prerequisites: Consent of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
RELI 488. SENIOR SEMINAR. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive 
(SI), Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the Biblical and Religious Studies major, and will be 
taken in the fall of the senior year. Topics will focus on a major issue in biblical studies, church history, 
or systematic theology.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
RELI 499. HONORS COURSE IN RELIGION. Advanced research in Biblical and Religious 
Studies is available to students on an individual basis and by prearrangement with the department.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES (CMIN) 
CMIN 112. INTRODUCTION TO YOUTH MINISTRY. This course will offer a broad overview 
of the field of youth ministry. This will include vocational questions, a brief study of ecclesiology, a 
survey of adolescent developmental issues, a consideration of ministry philosophies and programming 
approaches, and some important practical questions related to pastoral ethics and spiritual health.
 Alternate years (even), fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 122. INTRODUCTION TO CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course will introduce the 
student to the principles of Christian Ministry in contemporary society. Particular attention will be 



Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy / 89 
 

placed on biblical foundations of Christian education, Youth Ministry, para-church ministries, the local 
church, history of Christian education, and the educator as the agent of change.   
 Alternate years (odd), fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 228. CHRIST AND CULTURE. This course will survey some of the broad contours of 
culture, as well as how these cultural realities impact the way we "live and move and have our being..." 
(borrowed from Acts 17:28). Aside from exploring the cultural landscape, this course will focus on 
three essential questions: 1. What is the nature of our engagement as Christians with a culture that is 
not Christian? 2. How are we to exegete and respond to products and artifacts produced by the 
culture? 3. How do we communicate the gospel into the language and context of another culture not 
our own? Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 238. SPIRITIUAL FORMATION. This course serves as a core course for the Christian 
Ministry major. It is designed to be a reflective, interactive, and deeply shaping course in our lives as 
we pursue an understanding of holistic spiritual formation. The purpose of this course is to equip 
students in both the theory and practice of spiritual growth and development. This course focuses on 
our personal relationship with God. We will seek to develop an understanding of the necessary aspect 
of personal spirituality for ourselves through evaluation of Scripture and through self-reflection and 
discipline. Particular attention will be given to the psychology of faith and religion and to the influences 
of home and family on the development of faith. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 248. DISCIPLESHIP AND EVANGELISM. The course will address the theology, ministry, 
and implementation of biblical evangelism and discipleship. There will be various exposures to 
evangelism and discipleship methodology which will require the integration of various projects, guest 
lecturers, small-group assignments, and possible field trips. Emphasis will be placed on strategies for 
contemporary culture, youth culture, and other ministry contexts such as urban ministry and the 
mission field. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 258. COMMUNICATING THE GOSPEL. This course is designed to train students in the 
concepts and skills necessary to effectively communicate from the scripture. This phase of the 
Christian Ministry curriculum will focus on general communication skills, 
sermon design, preaching technique, with special emphasis on teaching and preaching the Word of 
God. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the 
Christian Ministries major. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 313. NATIONAL YOUTH WORKERS CONFERENCE. This course is a National Youth 
Workers’ Convention-based learning experience, exploring the latest research and trends in the 
discipline of Youth Ministry. The experience is maximized with university-based pre-readings and 
follow-up evaluation and discussion. Students will: 1. Develop a background in current youth ministry 
trends and research; 2. Engage in dialogue with a wide spectrum of reflective youth ministry 
professionals; 3. Demonstrate skills in learning, reflecting upon, and applying new youth ministry 
concepts; 4. Progress toward a pattern of continuing ministry and professional education. 
 Alternate years, fall semester only, one hour. 
 
CMIN 321. LEADERSHIP AND MINISTRY ADMINISTRATION. This course will focus on 
some of the nuts and bolts areas of every-day ministry in the parish and parachurch setting. It is a 
course about ministry behind the scenes. So often we think of ministry as what happens “in the front 
of the room.” But authentic leadership has to extend to, and attend to, the “dirty work” that makes 
possible what happens “in the front of the room.” This course explores that “dirty work,” and attempts 
to prepare students for precisely those behind-the-scene tasks that help define the role of a servant-
leader. Topics will include leadership, decision-making, staff relationships, budgeting, legal issues, 
team leadership, evaluation. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 322. PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF PREACHING AND TEACHING. In this 
practical laboratory course, designed to give students repeated practice in the skill of communicating 
the truths of Scripture, students will investigate and develop teaching and preaching skills. The course 
will review biblically-based and ministry related communication approaches to discern appropriate 



90 / Grove City College 

goals for biblical instruction, and work to understand how people learn in order to build a strong 
foundation in both the theory and practice of communication. Students will be offered numerous 
opportunities to sharpen their skills in teaching, sermon preparation and delivery. Prerequisite: 
Christian Ministries 258.   Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 361. WORSHIP AND PRAYER MINISTRY. This course examines corporate and private 
worship and prayer, following the Bible’s storyline concerning subjects from Genesis to the book of 
Revelation. We will establish biblical and theological principles which inform the practice of worship 
and prayer in the modern church and personal piety. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 412. BIBLICAL COUNSELING. This course equips the student with pastoral care and 
counseling methods and skills within a ministry context, including counseling various generations 
(children, youth, adults, and family). It covers an overview of psychological disorders, adolescent and 
family developmental and crisis issues, pre-, inter-, and post-marital counseling, family counseling, 
and methods of spiritual direction. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CMIN 480. INTERNSHIP IN CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course is designed to serve as an 
important practical field experience for students majoring in Christian Ministry. This experience 
provides broad-based exposure to all ministry and operational facets of any number of Christian 
ministry programs, whether those be in parish ministry or para-church ministry. The intent is to provide 
each student with a full-time placement in his or her area of study and/or concentration. In general, 
each student will assume an approved internship assignment in a local church or parachurch 
organization, minister in that position for a minimal number of hours, fulfill a number of core and 
specialization experiences, complete reading and reflection assignments, and evaluate the internship 
experience. Prerequisites: Christian Ministries 122, 238, and 258. Semester course, three to six hours. 
 
CMIN 486. ISSUES IN CONTEMPORARY MINISTRY. This course will examine various topics 
related to ministry preparedness: calling, ministry readiness and leadership, current cultural/biblical 
exegesis, and caring for one’s own soul. We will review biblical and theological principles which 
inform the practice of ministry. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.  

GREEK (GREK) 
GREK 101. INTRODUCTION TO NEW TESTAMENT GREEK I. A study of the grammar and 
syntax of New Testament Greek. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
GREK 102. INTRODUCTION TO NEW TESTAMENT GREEK II. Continuation of Greek 101. 
Prerequisite: Greek 101 or permission of the instructor.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
GREK 201. READINGS IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK I. Portions of the Gospels will be read. 
Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Greek 101 and 102; or permission of 
the instructor. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
GREK 202. READINGS IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK II. Portions of the Pauline Epistles will 
be read. Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Greek 101, 102, and 201; or 
permission of the instructor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
  
GREK 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Greek. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GREK 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Greek. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 



Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy / 91 
 

GREK 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third and fourth-year students to do 
independent projects in basic New Testament exegesis, word study, or classical Greek. Prerequisites: 
Greek 201 and 202; or consent of instructor. Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
GREK 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Greek. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GREK 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third and fourth-year students to do 
independent projects in basic New Testament exegesis, word study, or classical Greek. Prerequisites: 
Greek 201 and 202, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
GREK 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Greek. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

HEBREW (HEBR) 
HEBR 101. INTRODUCTION TO BIBLICAL HEBREW I. A study of the grammar and syntax of 
the Hebrew Bible. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HEBR 102. INTRODUCTION TO BIBLICAL HEBREW II. Continuation of Hebrew 101. 
Prerequisite: Hebrew 101 or permission of the instructor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HEBR 201. READINGS IN BIBLICAL HEBREW I. Portions of Narrative Literature will be read. 
Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Hebrew 101 and 102; or permission of 
the instructor. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HEBR 202. READINGS IN BIBLICAL HEBREW II. Portions of the Prophets will be read. 
Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Hebrew 101, 102, and 201; or 
permission of the instructor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HEBR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Hebrew. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HEBR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Hebrew. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HEBR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year Hebrew students to 
do independent projects in basic Old Testament exegesis. Prerequisite: Hebrew 201 and 202; or 
permission of the instructor. Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
HEBR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Hebrew. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HEBR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year Hebrew students to 
do independent projects in basic Old Testament exegesis. Prerequisite: Hebrew 201 and 202; or 
permission of the instructor. Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
HEBR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Hebrew. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 



92 / Grove City College 

LATIN (LATN) 
LATN 101. ELEMENTARY LATIN I. This is the beginning course of the elementary Classical 
Latin sequence. It assumes no previous knowledge of Latin. Students cover the fundamentals of Latin 
grammar and syntax while building a basic vocabulary. They will begin to read Latin in sentences and 
edited short selections. Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours. 
 
LATN 102. ELEMENTARY LATIN II. This course continues the study of Classical Latin grammar 
and syntax while continuing to build an extensive Latin vocabulary. It emphasizes the student’s ability 
to read basic unedited Latin prose and poetry. Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours. 
 
LATN 201. INTERMEDIATE LATIN I. This course is designed to increase the student’s facility in 
reading Latin prose and poetry from various eras—the Republic, the Empire and Late Antiquity. Strong 
emphasis is placed on accuracy and efficiency in translation.  
 Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours. 
 
LATN 202. INTERMEDIATE LATIN II. Further study of Latin prose and poetry to develop 
proficiency in reading and translating Latin. The focus will be on extensive readings from select Latin 
authors from antiquity and the Middle Ages. Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours. 
 
LATN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Latin. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
LATN 290. STUDIES IN LATIN. Readings and discussion of topics in literature or language. Subject 
matter varies. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
LATN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year students to do 
independent projects in Latin. Prerequisite: Latin 201 and 202; or permission of the instructor.
 Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
LATN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year students to do 
independent projects in Latin. Prerequisite: Latin 201 and 202; or permission of the instructor.
 Semester course, two or three hours 

PHILOSOPHY (PHIL) 
PHIL 161. INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY. A course designed to acquaint the student with 
the various fields and problems of philosophy. Primary sources are used.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 191. INTRODUCTION TO ETHICS. An introductory study of philosophical issues related 
to the moral life, such as: What should we love? How should we treat each other, and why? What does 
it mean to be a good person, and how might we become better people? and What is human life about, 
ultimately? Attention will be given to the insights of principle figures in the history of ethics from the 
ancient period to the present. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 201. SYMBOLIC LOGIC. A study of formal deductive logic with emphasis on testing 
arguments for validity and translating English statements into symbolic notation.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 211. GENERAL LOGIC. A study of reasoning in a variety of contexts. Attention is given to 
both inductive and deductive arguments. Many kinds of fallacies are studied as well as traditional 
syllogisms and logical puzzles. Diagramming techniques are developed.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 



Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy / 93 
 

PHIL 231. ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY. A survey of Western philosophy from the early Greeks 
through the beginning of the Christian era. Special attention will be given to the philosophies of Plato 
and Aristotle. Primary sources are used.  Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 232. MEDIEVAL PHILSOPHY. A study of the thought of prominent philosophers from St. 
Augustine to Ockham, addressing issues such as the nature and existence of God, theories of the good 
life, and the project of synthesizing Christianity with pagan philosophy. Primary sources are used. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 233. MODERN PHILOSOPHY. A survey of Western philosophy from Descartes through 
Kant, addressing issues pertaining to epistemology (especially the problems of certainty, philosophical 
methodology, and knowledge of God), and metaphysics (especially the nature of God, free will, and 
the immortality of the soul). Primary sources are used.  Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 243. SCIENCE AND THE HUMAN: INQUIRY, DESIGN AND THE PERSON. This 
course will examine historical and contemporary discussions of the nature of scientific inquiry and 
scientific knowledge, and related questions in the philosophy of science. It will also examine 
philosophical issues connected with design in nature, origins, and current technological development. 
Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211 and 212) and a lab science. The lab science may be 
taken concurrently with this course. This course satisfies the College’s SSFT General Education 
requirement. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 256. GOD, SUFFERING, AND NARRATIVE. A philosophical investigation into the 
problem of suffering-the problem of reconciling an all-powerful, all-knowing, and perfectly good God 
with the existence of horrendous evils-with a focus on understanding the differences between argument 
and narrative as sources of knowledge, the varieties of knowledge, the nature of God and evil, union 
with God, the relationship between love and the will, the fragmentation of the human self, and the 
biblical narratives of Abraham and Job. Other works of literature may be used. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in philosophy. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHIL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
philosophy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHIL 271. BIO-MEDICAL ETHICS. An introduction to the ethical issues arising in the field of 
biomedicine. Topics covered include issues such as abortion, eugenics, euthanasia, organ 
transplantation, behavior control, the right of a patient to refuse treatment, etc. Sophomore, junior, or 
senior standing is required. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 290. STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY. The subject matter for this course will vary each semester 
to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of philosophy. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 311. METAPHYSICS. Metaphysics examines such basic questions as “What is real?” “What 
is the nature of basic reality?” and “What is the nature of human beings?” This course will examine 
some influential discussions of metaphysics arising from these basic questions. Some topics we may 
discuss include the nature of identity, the relationship between mind and body, free will, and other 
topics that arise in answering basic metaphysical questions. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 312. EPISTEMOLOGY. Epistemology is the study of the nature and limits of human 
knowledge, understanding and rationality. Questions covered in this course may include “What is 
knowledge” “What gives a person a good reason for his/her beliefs?” “What are the limits of human 
understanding and rationality?” and “What does it mean to achieve excellence in intellectual pursuits?”
 Semester course, three hours. 



94 / Grove City College 

PHIL 313. ETHICS. The central question of ethics is “How should we live?” This course examines 
several theories concerning the norms governing human life. Topics may include the nature of 
happiness, the role of virtue in a life well lived, the relationship between moral rules and right action, 
the functions of reason and the passions in practical rationality and more. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 314. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION. A sustained philosophical reflection on the nature and 
existence of God, addressing questions such as the rationality of belief in God, the role of evidence in 
religious belief, the problem of evil, the moral and cognitive significance of religious experience, and 
the relationship between God and morality. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 340. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW. This course commonly examines such topics as the nature of 
law, the relationship of law to morality, the problem of judicial interpretation, justice, and rights.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for sophomore and junior students with 
previous background in philosophy to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
PHIL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
philosophy. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHIL 390. ADVANCED STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY. The subject matter for this course will vary 
each semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of philosophy.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with previous 
background in philosophy to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. Prerequisite: Twelve 
hours of philosophy coursework, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHIL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
philosophy. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHIL 488. PHILOSOPHY SEMINAR. This course is taught in a seminar style with student-led 
discussions, a focus on close readings of philosophical works, and a major research project. The course 
may be repeated, as topics covered vary by semester. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), 
Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Philosophy major. 
Prerequisite: Philosophy 161 or 191, Philosophy 201 or 211, and six hours of Philosophy courses above 
the 211 level; or permission of the instructor. Semester course, three hours.
 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY  
Dr. Antoszewski, Chair; Dr. Dudt, Dr. Farone, Dr. Jenkins, Dr. Pazehoski, Dr. Stauff, Dr. 
Wood, Dr. Yowler. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mrs. Lytle, Ms. McCullough, Mrs. 
Strain, Mr. Sullivan 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology—51 hours  
 Biology Core (17 hours): 
 Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 488. 
  
 
 



Biology / 95 
 

Groups (18 hours): 
 Choose one course from each of the following groups, as well as additional courses 

from any group to reach a minimum of 18 hours. Your group course section must 
include a minimum of three 4-credit lab courses. 

Group 1:  Molecular Mechanisms and Physiology 
Biology 301, 302, 322, 325, 334, 346, and 407. 

Group 2:  Vertebrate Systems 
Biology 310, 313, 314, and 341. 

Group 3:  Natural History 
Biology 305, 323, 326, and 409. 

Group 4:  Environmental and Ecological Diversity 
Biology 320, 328, 331, 403, and 421. 

Additional Group Course 
Complete one additional course from the groups outlined above. 

 Biology Electives (4 hours): 
Choose four hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin 
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research requires 
a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester). 

 Major-related requirements (12 hours): 
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; and Mathematics 161. 

 
Courses that count in the Biology major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology and General Science 
Secondary Education Certification—100 hours 
 Biology Core (17 hours): 
 Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 486. 
 Groups (18 hours): 

 Choose one course from each of the following groups, as well as additional courses 
from any group to reach a minimum of 18 hours. Your group course section must 
include a minimum of three 4-credit lab courses. 

Group 1:  Molecular Mechanisms and Physiology 
Biology 301, 302, 322, 325, 334, 346, and 407. 

Group 2:  Vertebrate Systems 
Biology 310, 313, 314, and 341. 

Group 3:  Natural History 
Biology 305, 323, 326, and 409. 

Group 4:  Environmental and Ecological Diversity 
Biology 320, 328, 331, 403, and 421. 

 Biology Electives (3 hours): 
Choose three hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin 
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research requires 
a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester). 

Major-related requirements (22 hours):  
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; Geology 201; Mathematics 161; Astronomy 206 or 
207; and Science 201 and/or Physics 121 (both are recommended, but Science 201 
may not follow Physics 121). 

Education requirements (40 hours):  
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 



96 / Grove City College 

while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Biology and General Science Secondary Education 
Certification major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology/Health—74 hours  
 Biology Core (17 hours): 

Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 488. 
 Groups (21-22 hours): 

Health Group 1: Biology 334, 341, 346, and 407. 
Health Group 2: Complete two courses from Biology 310, 313, 314, 325, or 322. 

 Biology Electives (9-10 hours): 
Choose nine to ten hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College 
Bulletin for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors 
research requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester). 

 Major-related requirements (26 hours): 
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 241; Mathematics 161; Physics 121; Psychology 201; 
and one of Psychology 101 or Sociology 101. 

 
Courses that count in the Biology/Health major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 This major is designed for those students interested in careers in medicine or allied 
health fields, including medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy, physical therapy, physician’s 
assistant, nursing, veterinary medicine, optometry, dentistry, and others, while retaining 
strong general biology training. This major requires courses that are prerequisites for many 
allied health graduate programs. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Conservation Biology—71 
hours  
 Biology Core (17 hours): 

Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 488. 
 Groups (28-29 hours): 

Conservation Group 1: Biology 305, 320, 326, 328, and 331. 
Conservation Group 2: Complete three courses from Biology 323, 403, 409, or 421. 

 Biology Electives (13-14 hours): 
Choose thirteen to fourteen hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the 
College Bulletin for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors 
research requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester). 

 Major-related requirements (12 hours): 
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; and Mathematics 161. 

 
Courses that count in the Degree in Conservation Biology major quality point average 
(MQPA):  

 All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 This major is designed to serve those students interested in careers in wildlife and 
natural resource management, or graduate study in the ecological, environmental, 
organismal or science fields, and others. This major requires courses that are prerequisites 



Biology / 97 
 

for many environmental, conservation biology, resource management, or other field-
oriented career paths. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Molecular Biology—71 hours  
 Biology Core (17 hours): 

Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 488. 
 Groups (15 hours): 

Molecular Group 1: Biology 301, 302, and 407. 
Molecular Group 2: Biology 314, 325, or 322. 

 Biology Electives (11 hours): 
Choose eleven hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin 
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research 
requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester). 

 Major-related requirements (28 hours): 
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 241, 242, 351, and 352; and Mathematics 161. 

 
Courses that count in the Molecular Biology major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 This major is designed to serve those students interested in careers in biochemical, 
molecular, genetic, or cellular biology fields. This major requires courses that are 
prerequisites for many graduate programs in biochemistry, molecular biology, and related 
graduate programs. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Biology (22 hours) 
 A minor in Biology will consist of Biology 101, 102, 233, 234; and six hours from 
Biology 301, 302, 305, 308, 310, 313, 314, 320, 322, 323, 325, 326, 327, 331, 334, 341, 
346, 372, 390, 403, 407, 409, or 421. 

 
 The Biology curriculum seeks to develop academic competency and professional 
awareness, to encourage meaningful integration between the biological sciences and other 
dimensions of life, and to promote lifelong learning skills in problem solving, research, and 
communication. Writing-intensive, speaking-intensive, and information literacy skills are 
developed by special assignments in core and seminar courses. 
 
 Departmental policy limits students to one major within the Department of Biology. 
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

BIOLOGY (BIOL) 
BIOL 101. GENERAL BIOLOGY I. The first course in a year-long introduction to the unifying 
principles of biology. This semester includes discussion of the chemistry of life, cells structure, energy, 
genetics, and physiology. Three lectures and one lab per week. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 102. GENERAL BIOLOGY II. A continuing discussion of the unifying principles of biology. 
Topics presented include: the diversity of life, kingdom plantae, animal reproduction and behavior, 
evolution, and ecological interactions. Three lectures and one lab per week. 
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 180. INTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGY (NON-HEALTH). This course is designed to 
prepare freshman, biology (non-health) students for their careers. Students will develop a professional 
portfolio, explore career options with their degree, learn about the importance of internships, discuss 



98 / Grove City College 

memberships in professional organizations and ways to optimize attendance at professional 
meetings/conferences. Furthermore, students will learn about ways to balance their spiritual and 
professional life.  Prerequisites: Biology 101; and freshman status or permission from instructor. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
BIOL 190. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully covered 
by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester. 
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
BIOL 207. GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY. This course will provide students with the basic 
concepts and principles within the field of Microbiology, especially as they relate to microorganisms 
and viruses that cause disease. Topics include an introduction to the major classes of microorganisms 
and viruses, microbial nutrition and metabolism, the control of microbial growth, and innate and 
adaptive immunity. Special emphasis will be placed on a subset of medically important pathogens as 
a way of illustrating the importance of understanding microbial physiology and pathogenesis as well 
as the prevention and control of infection. The course is designed specifically for students who are 
interested in pursuing a career in nursing. Prerequisite: Nursing Program majors only. 
 Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 208. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION. This course introduces 
the scope of environmental education. Topics addressed will include history and current trends, issue 
articulation and methodology, and development of problem-solving and communication skills to 
address environmental issues. Learning competencies K-12 will be emphasized and reinforced by 
environmental project-learning experiences. Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours. 
 
BIOL 233. GENETICS. An exploration of modern genetics beginning with early 20th century 
classical concepts as they relate to cells, organisms, and populations, continuing through late 20th 
century genetics as the molecular basis for classical concepts, and concluding with 21st century 
techniques and concepts including genomics and proteomics. Three lectures and one recitation per 
week. Prerequisite: Biology 102. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 234. CELL BIOLOGY. A focus on the organization and physiology of living cells using a 
problem-solving approach to learning. Topics will include transcription and translation, energy 
conversion, cell division, membranes, organelles, cytoskeleton, and cell communication among others. 
The lab provides core experience with model cellular systems and basic tools of biomolecular research. 
Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 233. Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in biology. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
BIOL 270. BIOLOGY RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in biology. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
BIOL 290. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully covered 
by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester. 
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
BIOL 301. MEDICAL GENETICS. This course focuses on the genetic causes of disease. A variety 
of diseases will be discussed, ranging from those caused by a single gene to very complex polygenic 
diseases.  Furthermore, genetic testing will be covered, along with newly emerging therapeutic 
approaches to treating genetic diseases.  The lab portion of the course will involve the use of current 
DNA-analysis techniques, as well as off-campus visits to clinical labs and lectures from practicing 
professionals.  Three lecture hours and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Biology 233 and 234. 
  Fall semester only, four hours. 
 



Biology / 99 
 

BIOL 302. DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY. Investigates major events in embryonic development 
in animals including fertilization, cleavage, axis specification, gastrulation, neurulation, and 
organogenesis. Classical and modern developmental techniques and experiments will be discussed. 
Labs emphasize embryonic manipulation using multiple model organisms in designed lab projects. 
Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 305. PLANT TAXONOMY. A study of plants in relation to their habitats, including aspects 
of plant geography and taxonomy in the lecture portion and methods of plant identification, collection, 
and preservation with emphasis on local flora in the lab portion. Three lectures and one lab per week. 
Prerequisite: Biology 234. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 308. NEUROBIOLOGY. An investigation of a broad array of topics in neurobiology, building 
on foundations of the Hodgkin-Huxley model of action potential, synaptic transmission, and 
neuromodulation. Studies include processing of sensory information in visual and auditory systems, 
the chemical senses, and others. The connections between sensory integration and motor behaviors in 
diverse animals will be explored. Neural mechanisms of learning and memory, sleep/wakefulness, and 
reward and decision-making also will be addressed. Recommended for students considering a career 
in research, health sciences, or psychology. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
BIOL 310. ZOONOTIC DISEASE AND PUBLIC HEALTH. This course offers a unique 
opportunity to explore the pathological relationships that affect the health of animals and man within 
the global community. General virology, bacteriology, parasitology, and mycology will be discussed 
with special focus on the history, ecology, pathology, and epidemiology of specific zoonotic diseases 
of current importance. Preventative medicine, population and global health, and “One-Health” 
concepts will be discussed. This course has special and timely importance in preparation for all pre-
health professional careers. Laboratory sessions may include field trips to local areas of public health 
interest as well as guest speakers from the community. Three lectures and one lab per week. 
Prerequisite: Biology 234. Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 313. HISTOLOGY. This course offers a focused study of the normal tissues of mammals from 
both a morphological and a functional view at a microscopic level. Selected common tissue pathologies 
will also be introduced, discussed, and observed. Each student gets experience in the preparation of 
fresh slides, as well as identifying all major body tissues under the light microscope and utilizing virtual 
technology. Prerequisite: Biology 234. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 314. IMMUNOLOGY. An exploration of the mammalian immune system on a cellular and 
molecular level. Beginning with a broad overview of concepts in immunology, the course will explore 
in detail topics including pattern recognition, clonal selection and deletion, immunological recognition 
at the molecular level, and lymphocyte development. Lectures are supplemented with three-
dimensional molecular modeling assignments. Special topics include the etiology of autoimmune 
disease and immunoevasive strategies employed by pathogens. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Summer online only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 320. CONSERVATION AND WILDLIFE BIOLOGY. A comparative study of 
representative vertebrates with emphasis on population dynamics, biodiversity, morphological 
adaptation, wildlife conservation, and resource management. The lab involves field identifications, 
aging, and morphological adaptations of representative vertebrates. Three lectures and one lab per 
week. Prerequisite: Biology 102. Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 322. THE BIOLOGY OF CANCER. This course focuses on the causes of cancer and 
progression of the disease. The common features of all cancers will be discussed in addition to the 
distinguishing characteristics of a subset of cancers. Throughout the course, therapeutic targets will be 
identified, and novel therapeutic approaches will be considered. Prerequisite: Biology 234. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



100 / Grove City College 

BIOL 323. INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY. This course will provide students with a comprehensive 
presentation to the major invertebrate phyla through a combination of lectures and workshops. But 
because invertebrates comprise roughly 97% of animal species on the planet, we will emphasize 
terrestrial invertebrates, especially live ones locally available. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 325. VIROLOGY. An exploration of the theoretical and experimental basis of virology, with 
emphasis on mechanisms of virus replication, similarities and differences among virus groups 
including medically important viruses, how viruses ensure their own survival, and virus-host 
interactions including disease and host defenses. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234 
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 326. EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY. The objectives of this course are to introduce students 
to the theory of evolution, from the production and maintenance of genetic variation to the formation 
of new species, to present a summary of the history of life on earth, to familiarize students with the 
mechanisms of evolution, and the concepts of speciation and of major innovations. The material 
explanation for the origins of life and biological diversification will be examined in light of the Biblical 
doctrine of God’s sovereignty in creation and process. Prerequisite: Biology 234 or permission of 
instructor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 327. ESSENTIAL LITERATURE FOR BIOLOGISTS. This course is designed to introduce 
students to the seminal works that serve as the foundation for the broad sub-fields of biology. Students 
will read twelve to fourteen books (or excerpts from books) and critique those works in terms of their 
contribution to both modern biology and contemporary society. Prerequisite: Biology 101 and 102; or 
permission of instructor. Intersession course; periodically during regular semesters, three hours. 
 
BIOL 328. FOUNDATIONS OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SCIENCE. This course offers 
an introduction into geographic information science (GIS). The course will focus on the foundational 
elements of spatial data analysis with students learning and applying essential mapping skills within 
the ArcGIS® software, specifically demonstrating the ability to acquire, manage, and analyze spatial 
data. The course will meet three times a week and consist of both lecture and in-class software analysis. 
Prerequisite: Biology 102.  Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 331. ECOLOGY. A study of responses of living systems to a changing environment in relation 
to selected ecosystems with emphasis on the interrelations of individual, population, community, and 
habitat. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 334. BIOCHEMISTRY FOR BIOLOGY. This course covers all the major principles in the 
field of biochemistry. Proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids are studied within the themes 
of macromolecule structure & function, metabolic pathways, and gene expression. Specific topics 
include oxygen binding proteins, enzyme catalysis, membrane transport, synthesis/degradation 
pathways of carbohydrates, lipids, & amino acids, and the informational pathways of DNA replication, 
transcription, & translation. Prerequisites: Biology 101, 102, and Chemistry 241. No credit will be 
given to students who have already received credit for Chemistry 351 or 352. Biology 334 does not 
fulfill the biochemistry requirement for Biochemistry majors.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 341. HUMAN/MAMMALIAN ANATOMY. Gross and microscopic anatomy of mammals 
will be explored with emphasis on humans. These holistic studies of the body will include 11 major 
systems: integumentary, skeletal, muscular, circulatory, respiratory, renal, digestive, reproductive, 
neurologic, endocrine, and lymphatic. This course illustrates normal form and function principles and 
has special importance in preparation of the health-related careers. Three lectures and one lab per week. 
Prerequisite: Biology 234. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 346. HUMAN/MAMMALIAN PHYSIOLOGY. A study of the cellular basis for vertebrate 
organ system function with emphasis on human physiology. Systems discussed include muscle, 
nervous, endocrine, reproductive, urinary, digestive and cardiopulmonary. Laboratory exercises will 



Biology / 101 
 

utilize physiology simulations, problem sets and hands-on investigation. Three lectures and one lab 
per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234. Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for individual study of specialized topics in 
the biological sciences. Prerequisite: Completion of at least eight credits in biology, permission of the 
department chair, and a faculty sponsor. Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
BIOL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Course providing independent opportunity in biological 
research under the supervision of a faculty mentor. Prerequisites: Completion of at least eight credits 
in biology, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
BIOL 372. CONTEMPORARY TOPICS. This course presents an opportunity for students to study 
a topic of particular interest to the faculty member offering the course. Heavy focus will be placed on 
reading primary literature, understanding the history of the field and discussing specific experiments 
and techniques which led to major findings in the field. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Offered periodically, one hour. 
 
BIOL 390. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully covered 
by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester. 
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
BIOL 403. BASIS OF WILDLIFE BEHAVIOR. A comparative study of the physiological and 
ecological basis of animal behaviors and its interaction in the ecology and management of wildlife 
populations. Emphasis is placed on the innate and learned behaviors in disease transmission, and in 
the evolution and management of rural and urban wildlife populations. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 407. MICROBIOLOGY. An introduction to microorganisms, primarily bacteria that cause 
disease in humans, which focuses on microbial structures, genetics, and life cycles, and also delves 
into molecular pathogenesis mechanisms and interactions between pathogens and the mammalian 
immune system. Two lectures and two labs per week. Prerequisites: Biology 234 and Chemistry 111 
and 113. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 409. ENTOMOLOGY. A study of the class Insecta, including insect diversity, life histories, 
morphology, physiology, behavior, ecology, and impact on human society. The course includes a 
combination of lecture and lab components. The lab component includes field excursions for collecting 
insects for display and anatomical/taxonomic investigation. Course traditions include a black-light 
party and a bug feast. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, four hours. 
 
BIOL 421. AQUATIC AND FISHERY BIOLOGY. A study of freshwater and marine ecosystems, 
including the impact of pollution on aquatic environments, water chemistry, taxonomy of aquatic 
organisms, fisheries, and management of aquatic systems. Prerequisite: Biology 234.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
BIOL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for individual study of specialized topics in 
the biological sciences. Prerequisites: Completion of at least eight credits in biology, permission of the 
department chair, and a faculty sponsor.  Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
BIOL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Course providing independent opportunity in biological 
research under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisites: Completion of at least eight credits 
in biology, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
BIOL 480. INTERNSHIP IN BIOLOGY. Qualified upperclassmen may participate in unpaid, 
individual off-campus experiences in research, medical, environmental, or other approved settings 



102 / Grove City College 

under the guidance of both an on-site host supervisor and a Biology faculty sponsor. Grade is 
dependent upon required update communication with the faculty sponsor, written evaluation by the 
on-site supervisor, and submission of an internship paper to the faculty sponsor. Prerequisites: 
Minimum rising sophomore status, minimum 8 credit hours of biology, and permission of the 
department.  Summer or semester course, one to six hours. 
 
BIOL 486. SEMINAR FOR BIOLOGY TEACHERS. Provides instruction in how to prepare for 
and conduct effective biology learning experiences. Students will instruct classmates through 
presentations, participate in Project WET training, and conduct research using library/web resources. 
Students will also practice instruction in an actual classroom or informal setting. This course fulfills 
the Writing Intensive (WI), Information Literacy (IL), and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for 
education majors in the Department of Biology. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing education 
majors and acceptance into a teacher certification program; or permission of instructor.  
  Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
BIOL 488. SEMINAR IN BIOLOGY. Required of all majors in the Department of Biology except 
for those in teacher certification programs. Students will apply the knowledge they have obtained in 
previous biology classes by writing a literature review on a biological topic of their interest. Students 
will learn how to perform in-depth research of scientific literature through the use of library/web 
resources and will gain experience in both reading and critically evaluating peer-reviewed journal 
articles. Special emphasis will be placed on the students’ participation in a peer-review process as they 
evaluate their peers’ papers. The class culminates with each student delivering a professional oral 
presentation about their chosen topic. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Information 
Literacy (IL), and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for majors in the Department of Biology. 
Prerequisite: Senior standing. Semester course, one hour. 
 
BIOL 499. HONORS IN BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special aptitude 
in biology may undertake supervised biological research. Registration for the honors course requires 
prior completion of an on- or off-campus research experience. A research paper is required, and a 
public presentation is encouraged. Prerequisite: Senior standing, permission of the department chair, 
and a faculty sponsor.  Semester course, one hour. 

GEOLOGY (GEOL) 
GEOL 201. PHYSICAL/ ENVIRONMENTAL GEOLOGY. A study of the internal and external 
forces affecting the surface of earth and the distribution of geologic resources and the environmental 
impacts on the extraction and use of these resources. This course is also designed to relate the historical 
and current geologic activity to the local ecology and land use planning. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
BUSINESS PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING 
AND FINANCE 
Mrs. Stone, Chair; Dr. Grimm, Dr. McFeaters, Ms. Shultz, Dr. O. Zhang. Additional 
Instructional Faculty: Mr. Davidek, Mrs. DiDonato, Mr. Natali. 
 
 The mission of the business program at Grove City College is to prepare our 
students to become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society 
as a whole. This mission incorporates the following learning outcomes: 

1. Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills: Our students will 
demonstrate the entry level knowledge and analytical skills necessary in 
their professional field. 

2. Communication Skills: Our students will demonstrate the written and 
verbal skills needed to communicate effectively within the business 
environment. 



Accounting and Finance / 103 
 

3. Ethics: Our students will demonstrate a Christian understanding of 
business which reflects its moral and ethical responsibilities to all 
potential stakeholders. 

4. Global Perspective: Our students will demonstrate an understanding of 
the global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment. 

5. Accounting Knowledge and Skills: Our students will demonstrate the 
ability to prepare and analyze financial information used in managerial 
decision-making and external reporting for publicly- and privately- held 
business organizations, governmental entities, and non-profit 
organizations. Our students will demonstrate an understanding of 
accounting systems and their related internal controls and will 
demonstrate the ability to prepare and to audit financial statements that 
are generated from these accounting systems. Our students will 
demonstrate the ability to apply federal tax law in the preparation of 
individual tax returns. Our students will engage with the coursework 
needed to prepare for professional certification exams. 

6. Finance Knowledge and Skills: Our students will demonstrate 
knowledge and skills that meet or exceed requirements to compete for 
entry-level positions in a variety of settings, including corporate finance 
and the financial services industry. This includes knowledge of finance 
principles, investments, and advanced topics in corporate finance. Our 
students will engage with the coursework needed to prepare for 
professional certification exams. 

 
 The ACBSP accredited Accounting and Finance majors prepare students for entry-level 
careers in all arenas of accounting and finance, including public accounting; corporate, 
partnership, or sole proprietorship accounting; governmental and NGO accounting; 
corporate finance; financial services; and various positions in the non-profit sector, 
including areas such as education and health care. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Accounting—70 hours 
 Accounting Core (30 hours): 
 Accounting 201-202, 301-302, 303, 321, 401, 402, 403, and 405.  
 Business Core (21 hours): 
  Management 103, 201, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104; and Finance 301. 
 Major Electives (9 hours) 

Choose nine additional hours from any 200-, 300-, or 400-level courses in 
Accounting, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Management, or 
Marketing (maximum of 3 hours of internship credit toward the 70 hours for the 
B.S. degree). Students pursuing their CPA license should consider taking 
Accounting 404, Accounting 406, and/or Accounting 410. (Please see additional 
information later in this section under “CPA Licensing Requirements”.) 

 Major-related courses (10 hours): 
  Mathematics 141 or 161*; Economics 101 and 102. 

* Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

 
Courses that count in the Accounting major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, excluding 
MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. A maximum 



104 / Grove City College 

of three accounting (ACCT) courses may be taken in any one semester unless approval is 
obtained by department chair and faculty advisor. 
 
 It is recommended that students planning to enter the field of public accounting take 
additional accounting courses to satisfy their major electives. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Finance—67 hours 
 Business Core Courses (33 hours): 

Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
110, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Math/Economics Courses (10 hours): 
 Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161*.  

*Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

 Finance Major Core Courses (12 hours): 
  Finance 332, 341, 436, and 440. 

Finance Major Elective Courses (12 hours): 
Choose twelve additional hours from any 200-, 300-, or 400-level courses in 
Accounting, Economics, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, 
Management, or Marketing. A minimum of six hours must be Finance, excluding 
460 and 480. A maximum of three hours of internship may count as finance electives; 
any remaining internship credits will count as general electives. 
 

Courses that count in the Finance major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, and “MNGT” 
prefix, excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to 
graduate. 
 
 Students who graduate with a major in finance receive comprehensive training in 
business, along with specialized instruction in corporate finance and investment 
management. Advanced level courses in capital markets, financial planning and valuation 
provide the student with career-specific training. Students learn practical applications from 
research projects, simulations, and Harvard-style case studies. 
 
Writing, Speaking and Information Literacy Intensive Courses 
 It is essential for students majoring in the Department of Accounting and Finance to 
possess strong writing, speaking, and information literacy (knowing how to locate, analyze, 
and use information in decision-making) skills in preparation for careers in accounting and 
finance and/or graduate studies. The curriculum requirements specifically designed to 
develop these skills include Management 214 Business, Ethics, and Society and 
Management 486 Business Policy and Strategy. Please see course descriptions that follow 
for more information.  
 
CPA Licensing Requirements: 150-Credit Hour, 4-Year Double Majors: 
 The Department of Accounting and Finance offers two programs, one leading to a 150-
credit hour double major in Accounting and Finance and the second leading to a 150-credit 
hour double major in Accounting and Business Analysis. Both programs, which satisfies 
the CPA licensing requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as well as most 
other states, are designed, through summer, intersession, and/or winter term coursework, to 
be completed in four years. Students entering Grove City College as freshmen with 



Accounting and Finance / 105 
 

Advanced Placement (AP) credits or other college credits will find this program particularly 
of interest. 
 The traditional 128-credit hour Accounting major is available as a degree option and it 
is the foundation of the 150-hour double majors. In addition to completing requirements for 
the Accounting major as outlined on the previous page, students choosing a double major 
option will also need to satisfy the following requirements: 

• Accounting-Finance Dual Major 
• Finance 332, 341, 436, and 440; International Business 205; and Management 

110 (18 hours).  
• Accounting-Business Analysis Dual Major 

• Computer Science 141, 220, 244; International Business 205; Management 
202, 204, 307, and 310 (24 hours). Students pursing the CPA are also 
recommended to complete Accounting 404, 406, or 410.  

 Students interested in this dual major program  will  be on record with Accounting as 
their first major and either Finance or Business Analysis as their second major. Students 
may enter Grove City College declaring the double major or may add the second major after 
matriculation. Please contact  the Accounting and Finance Department Chair for more 
information.  
 Students who are interested in obtaining 150 credit hours to meet CPA licensing 
requirements are not limited to these double major programs. Students may select any 
courses they choose to make up the additional credits beyond 128 hours. Popular options 
include the Forensic Accounting concentration (discussed below), double majoring in 
another Business Program major, double majoring in another College program, and or 
minoring in any number of areas across the College programs.  
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Forensic Accounting (15 hours) 
 Students majoring in Accounting can earn a concentration in Forensic Accounting by 
completing Accounting 305 and 404; Sociology 221; Communication Arts 303; and either 
Management 304 or 325. Note: Accounting 305, 404, and either Management 304 or 325 
satisfy the nine credits of major electives required for the Accounting major. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Accounting (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Accounting majors only)  
 A minor in Accounting will consist of Accounting 201, 202, 301, 321, 405, and one 
course from Accounting 302, 303, 305, 401, 402, 403, or 406. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Finance (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Finance majors only)  
 A minor in Finance shall consist of Finance 301, 332, 440, and three courses from 
Finance 334, 341, 435, 436, 462, or Entrepreneurship 430. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ACCOUNTING (ACCT) 
ACCT 201. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING I. This introductory course focuses on the 
preparation and use of accounting information in the financial reporting environment. Emphasis is 
placed on the understanding and application of steps involved in the accounting cycle as well as on the 
recognition, measurement, and reporting issues associated with various financial statement accounts 
for sole proprietorships and partnerships using the accrual basis of accounting. The course also exposes 
the student to career opportunities in the accounting profession. Fall semester only, three hours. 



106 / Grove City College 

ACCT 202. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING II. Course topics include accounting for debt and 
stockholder’s equity, financial statement analysis, statement of cash flows, as well as introductions to 
managerial accounting techniques including cost-volume-profit analysis, budgeting, product costing, 
standard costs, and decision-making analysis. Prerequisite: Accounting 201.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in accounting. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ACCT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
accounting. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ACCT 301. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I. A study of the financial statements with an 
emphasis on the income statement and asset section of the balance sheet. This course also focuses on 
accounting theory, the interpretation of financial accounting standards associated with the balance 
sheet, and International Financial Reporting Standards [IFRS]. Prerequisite: Accounting 202. 
 Fall semester only, three hours plus lab. 
 
ACCT 302. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II. A continued study of the financial statements 
with an emphasis on the liabilities and stockholder’s equity sections of the balance sheet. Includes 
topics such as earnings per share (EPS), accounting for income taxes, leases, and pensions, and the 
statement of cash flows. This course also focuses on accounting theory and the interpretation of current 
financial accounting standards, including IFRS. Prerequisite: Accounting 301. 
 Spring semester only, three hours plus lab. 
 
ACCT 303. COST ACCOUNTING. A study of cost flows in a manufacturing environment and the 
assignment of direct and indirect manufacturing costs to a company's cost of goods sold and inventory 
accounts by the application of job order, process, and standard costing systems. The course also focuses 
on the ways in which accounting information is used in operational decision-making. Prerequisite: 
Accounting 202.    Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 305. FORENSIC ACCOUNTING. This course is intended to provide students with an 
introductory exposure to the field of forensic accounting. Much broader than fraud auditing, forensic 
accounting involves the use of intelligence-gathering techniques, along with other accounting and 
business skills, to present trial testimony and to develop information and opinions for use by attorneys 
in litigation. Specific topics include the roles and responsibilities of the forensic accountant, fraud 
standards and different types of fraud, ethical considerations, internal controls, business valuation, 
breach of contract, and damage calculations. Prerequisites: Accounting 202 and junior standing.
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 321. ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS. A study of the use of a variety of 
resources designed to transform financial and other data into financial information for decision-
making. Consideration of these systems must deal with issues such as the flow of transactions and 
related procedures; summarizing the financial data into meaningful formats for both internal and 
external reporting; documentation for audit trail purposes; data security and backup; and disaster 
recovery planning. The course will emphasize transaction cycles, business processes, systems controls, 
and accounting database applications. Prerequisites: Accounting 202.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in accounting. 
Prerequisites: Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



Accounting and Finance / 107 
 

ACCT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
accounting. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ACCT 390. STUDIES IN ACCOUNTING. Studies in areas of accounting not fully covered by 
regular departmental offerings. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ACCT 401. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING I. A study of the financial accounting effects on business 
entities involved in mergers, consolidations, and divestitures with an emphasis on the proper 
recognition and recording of acquisition, the elimination of inter-company transactions, and the 
preparation of consolidated financial statements. Prerequisite: Accounting 302. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 402. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING II. A study of the financial accounting principles used in 
the preparation of general-purpose financial statements for governmental units, not-for-profit 
corporations and associations including colleges and universities, health care entities, voluntary health 
and welfare organizations, and partnerships. Foreign exchange transactions and other special topics 
are also covered. Prerequisite: Accounting 302. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 403. AUDITING. A study of the duties and responsibilities of professional auditing, including 
types of audits and audit programs, audit planning, evidence, risk assessment, preparation of audit 
working papers, and audit reports. Prerequisites: Accounting 302, 321, and senior standing. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 404. ADVANCED AUDITING. Additional auditing issues are explored, including practical 
applications involving statistical sampling, IT controls, risk assessment, and audit evidence gathering. 
Legal issues in auditing and other types of non-attest services are also discussed. Prerequisites: 
Accounting 403 and senior standing.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 405. TAX ACCOUNTING. A study of the provisions of the federal tax laws and the proper 
practices in preparing tax reports with emphasis on tax preparation for individuals. Prerequisites: 
Accounting 202 and senior standing. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 406. ADVANCED TAX ACCOUNTING. Theory and practice in the treatment of partnership 
and corporate taxes with emphasis on the accounting and management planning aspects. Prerequisites: 
Accounting 405 and senior standing. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 410. CONTEMPORARY ACCOUNTING THEORY AND PRACTICE. A capstone 
course that stresses contemporary financial accounting issues and theory and that familiarizes the 
student with interpretation of current accounting standards. Other non-financial topics are briefly 
covered. Prerequisites: Accounting 302 and senior standing.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ACCT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in accounting. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  

Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ACCT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
accounting. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ACCT 480. INTERNSHIP IN ACCOUNTING. This is an opportunity for accounting majors to 
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and 
department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months. Students will be 
graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with a written paper and journal. 
Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the freshman year of study.   
 One to six hours. 



108 / Grove City College 

FINANCE (FNCE) 
FNCE 105. PERSONAL FINANCE. An introduction to the  complexities of personal financial 
planning, such as managing personal debt (including educational debt); choosing health, life, and 
property insurance; making investments; and understanding income taxation, retirement, and estate 
planning. It provides a broad overview of important personal financial management tools and is geared 
towards students of all majors. (This course does not count towards the Accounting or Finance major 
requirements.) Semester course, three hours. 
 
FNCE 301. PRINCIPLES OF FINANCE. This course explains important concepts and applications 
in corporate finance, such as time value of money, security valuation, capital budgeting, portfolio 
theory, and capital structure. This is a mathematics intensive course designed to develop analytical 
thinking skills. Prerequisites: Accounting 201 and Management 201. This course is the key building 
block for upper-level finance courses; as such, Finance majors should  complete the course by the end 
of the  sophomore year. Additionally, it is a building block for ACCT 302, and Accounting majors 
should complete the course by the end of the first semester of sophomore year. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
FNCE 332. INVESTMENTS. This course examines a variety of topics commonly associated with 
investment in publicly traded securities and mutual funds. It examines ways in which financial market 
data is utilized as inputs into models for asset pricing and portfolio management. It also explores topics 
such as index construction, portfolio performance assessment, and risk management techniques using 
derivatives. Prerequisites: Finance 301 and junior standing. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FNCE 334. INVESTMENT VALUATION. This course covers techniques used to assess the 
investment merit of publicly traded debt and equity instruments. The course focuses on various 
applications of fundamental and technical analysis. Students will use these techniques to construct 
research reports and investment recommendations. They will also provide a presentation based upon 
the results of their analysis. Prerequisites: Finance 301 and 332. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FNCE 341. FINANCIAL MODELING. This course equips students with knowledge of fundamental 
financial models and ability to apply them using Excel. Such models cover time value of money and 
stock valuation, portfolio management, option pricing, and bond pricing. After this course, students 
are expected to use these models using Excel to solve financial problems in these areas. Prerequisites: 
Finance 301 and 332. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FNCE 435. FINANCIAL PLANNING. This course provides a comprehensive exploration of 
financial planning topics (in conjunction with the recommendation of the Academy of Financial 
Services and the CFP Board of Standards) including the financial planning process, client interactions, 
time value of money applications, personal financial statements, cash flow and debt management, asset 
acquisition, education planning, risk management, investment planning, retirement planning, special 
circumstances, plan integration, ethics, and the business of financial planning. Prerequisites: Finance 
301 and junior standing. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FNCE 436. CAPITAL MARKETS. This course explores the functions and operations of money, 
capital, and derivatives markets. It addresses topics such as stock market efficiency, financial market 
integration and globalization, as well as markets for venture and private capital. The characteristics of 
various financial instruments that trade over-the-counter and on organized exchanges will also be 
reviewed. Prerequisite: Finance 301. Spring semester only, three hours.  
 
FNCE 440. ADVANCED CORPORATE FINANCE. This course focuses on the processes and 
procedures employed by financial managers to help ensure that actions taken enhance shareholder 
value. Topics include applications of net present value and options pricing models to capital budgeting 
decisions, techniques for determining the cost of capital, valuation and performance measurement, 
mergers and acquisitions, and risk analysis and management. This course will emphasize the use of 
spreadsheets for model building and analysis. Prerequisite: Finance 301.  
  Fall semester only, three hours. 



Accounting and Finance / 109 
 

FNCE 462. INTERNATIONAL FINANCE. Knowledge of international finance is essential as 
markets become increasingly globalized.  This course focuses on financial issues faced by both 
multinational corporate financial managers and individual investors with a global perspective.  Among 
these issues covered are foreign currency exchange, cultural and regulatory differences between 
countries, international balance of payments, and international financial markets. Prerequisites: 
Finance 301, International Business 205 (Global Business Issues), and one of the following: Finance 
332, 334, or 440.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FNCE 480. INTERNSHIP IN FINANCE. This is an opportunity for finance majors to participate in 
a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and department faculty 
member. Most internships take place during the summer months. Students will be graded based on an 
employer performance evaluation along with a written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good 
academic standing and completion of the freshman year of study. One to six hours. 
 
BUSINESS PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT OF 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Mr. Sweet, Chair; Ms. English, Mr. K. Smith. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. English, 
Mr. Lewis. 
 
The mission of the Business Program at Grove City College is to prepare our students to 
become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society as a whole. This 
mission incorporates the following learning outcomes: 
 

1. General Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills - Our students will 
demonstrate the entry-level knowledge, analytical skills, and information literacy 
generally necessary in business. 

2. Communication Skills - Our students will demonstrate the written and verbal 
skills needed to communicate effectively within the business environment. 

3. Ethics - Our students will demonstrate a Christian understanding of business 
which reflects their moral and ethical responsibilities to all potential 
stakeholders. 

4. Global Perspective - Our students will demonstrate an understanding of the 
global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment. 

5. Entrepreneurship Knowledge and Skills - Our students will demonstrate entry-
level knowledge and skills necessary to successfully plan, launch, and operate 
startup commercial and social enterprises, and to develop new business models 
in corporate contexts. Students will acquire experience and competencies in 
ideation, lean startup methodologies, competitive research, blended-value 
business modeling, digital technologies, business planning, and in the financial, 
legal, ethical and faith-minded dimensions of entrepreneurship. 

 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Entrepreneurship—67 
hours 

Entrepreneurial Core (34 hours): 
Entrepreneurship 101 and 102. 
Entrepreneurship 201, 302, 303, 306, 307, 309, 312, 430, 466, and 467. 

Business Core (15 hours): 
Accounting 201 and 202; Finance 301; Management 201; and Marketing 104. 

Entrepreneurial Electives (12 hours):  
Complete 12 hours choosing from Entrepreneurship 104, 314, 317, 319, 324, 326, 
328, 330, 331, 390, 402, 408, 409, 423, 424, 426, 468, 488, or any two courses from 



110 / Grove City College 

any 300- or 400-level Accounting, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International 
Business, Management, or Marketing offerings not listed. A maximum of three 
credits of Entrepreneurship 480 Internship may also count as entrepreneurial 
electives; any remaining internship credits will count as general electives. 

Major-Related Courses (6-7 hours): 
Economics 101; and Computer Science 141, Mathematics 141, or Mathematics 161. 

 
Courses that count in the Entrepreneurship major quality point average (MQPA):  
 All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, 
excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 It is essential for students pursuing the Entrepreneurship major to possess strong 
writing, speaking, and information literacy skills in preparation for future careers in 
business. Four required courses for the major will equip students with these skills: 
Entrepreneurship 466 Business Planning is designated to enhance Writing Intensive (WI) 
skills; Entrepreneurship 102 Technology for the Entrepreneur for Information Literacy (IL) 
skills; and Entrepreneurship 101 The Entrepreneurial Mind: Creativity and Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 467 Corporate Innovation for Speaking Intensive (SI) skills. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Entrepreneurship (22 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Entrepreneurship majors only)  
 A minor in Entrepreneurship will consist of Accounting 201; Entrepreneurship 101, 
102, 201; Finance 301; and nine hours from Entrepreneurship 302, 303, 307, 309 or 328, 
312, 314, 317, 408, 423, 430, or 467. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Digital Entrepreneurship (21 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Entrepreneurship majors only)  
 A minor in Digital Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 101, 328, 330, 
409; Design 101, 210: and one of Entrepreneurship 309 or Marketing 315. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Redemptive Entrepreneurship (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Biblical & Religious Studies, non-Christian Ministries, and non-
Entrepreneurship majors only)  
 A minor in Redemptive Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 307, 314, 
468, and three courses from Religion 248, 251, 320, Christian Ministries 228, and 248. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Missional Entrepreneurship (18 hours) 
(Restricted to Biblical & Religious Studies and Christian Ministries majors only)  
 A minor in Missional Entrepreneurship will consist of including Entrepreneurship 101, 
201, 307, 314, 408, and 468. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Enterprise (21 hours) 
(Restricted to Business Program majors only)  
 A minor in Social Enterprise will consist of Entrepreneurship 307; Entrepreneurship 
408 or International Business 408; Sociology 201, 356; Communication Arts 225 or Global 
Studies 300; and six hours from Sociology 208, 314; Social Work 101, 305, 382; or 
Entrepreneurship, Management, or Sociology 390 with department chair approval.  
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Entrepreneurship (21 hours) 
(Restricted to Sociology majors only)  



Entrepreneurship / 111 
 

 A minor in Social Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 101, 307; 
Entrepreneurship 408 or International Business 408; Accounting 201; Finance 301; 
Management 103; and Marketing 104. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Innovation (21 hours) 
(Restricted to Entrepreneurship majors only)  
 A minor in Social Innovation will consist of Entrepreneurship 408 or International 
Business 408; Sociology 201, 356; Communication Arts 225 or Global Studies 300; and 
nine hours from Sociology 208, 314; Social Work 101, 305, 382; and Entrepreneurship, 
Management, or Sociology 390 with department chair approval.  
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP (ENTR) 
ENTR 101. ENTREPRENEURIAL MIND: CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION. This course 
introduces the student to entrepreneurial thought and the process for innovation and idea generation. 
Students begin to develop their own entrepreneurial mindset and the business skills essential to the 
entrepreneurial experience. Students are introduced to the basics of business and challenged to think 
creatively about forming businesses or designing products to solve customer problems and address 
unmet needs in the commercial and social arenas. Through experiential learning, case studies, business 
writing assignments, and creative thinking exercises, students will develop a disciplined thought 
process for starting and running their own enterprise. This course satisfies the Speaking-Intensive 
requirement for Entrepreneurship majors. Corequisite: Entrepreneurship 102 for Entrepreneurship 
majors. All other majors may take the course as an elective without the corequisite.  
  Fall semester only, three hours. 
  
ENTR 102. TECHNOLOGY FOR THE ENTREPRENEUR. Students learn to use technology 
commonly used by entrepreneurs in the following areas: presentations, networking, blogging, social 
media, design, basic websites, eCommerce, and prototyping.  This course satisfies the Information 
Literacy requirement for Entrepreneurship majors. Entrepreneurship majors take this concurrently with 
Entrepreneurship 101. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ENTR 104. LIFE DESIGN STUDIO. Students often struggle with knowing how to define their 
future.  Whether one is trying to choose a major or to figure out how to go about pursuing a career 
using that chosen major, it’s a process that’s often filled with uncertainty and angst. By approaching 
these challenges as a designer would approach creating a product, students will use proven design 
methods to understand who they are, what they want to do, and how they can build a life full of joy. 
During this class, students will explore how to apply design thinking principles to their lives while 
learning more about themselves and how to connect their work to God’s work. 
  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 201. LEAN LAUNCHPAD. The Lean LaunchPad uses the Customer Discovery process and 
the Business Model Canvas to collapse the infinite possibilities of a startup into a set of solvable 
problems. Students will be taught how to use the information that they collect from customers to 
validate and/or invalidate their business model hypotheses. Throughout the course, the teams will 
modify their business models as they iterate, pivot, and/or restart their ideas. It provides real world, 
hands-on learning on what it’s like to actually start a company. This class is not about how to write a 
business plan. It is a practical entrepreneurial lab in which the goal is to create an entrepreneurial 
experience that includes the pressures and demands of the real world in an early-stage startup within 
the constraints of the classroom and with a limited amount of time. Students will work in teams, 
learning how to use a business model to brainstorm and test each critical element of a company. 
Students will also learn how to develop customers in real business scenarios, testing product viability 
and authentic demand.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



112 / Grove City College 

ENTR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in entrepreneurship. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
entrepreneurship. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 302. SALES IN THE STARTUP. The purpose of this course is to understand the theory and 
practice of sales as it is approached in the environment of a startup business. The class will explore 
strategic selling methodologies, such as partnership development, channel development, and seminar-
based sales, as well as specific sales skills and techniques. Students will learn about the particular 
challenges of selling in the context of a newly launched business, and they will have the opportunity 
to meet and interact with sales professionals who have specialized in this sales context. Throughout 
the course, students will have opportunities to practice sales skills.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 303. LAW FOR ENTREPRENEURS. This course provides an awareness and basic 
understanding of the legal issues frequently encountered by entrepreneurs. The course specifically 
examines the legal issues surrounding the organization, financing, and operations of a company, 
including ownership structuring, the raising of capital, federal securities requirements and exemptions, 
determining valuation, intellectual property, board formation, human resources, and exit strategies. 
Students may not receive credit for both Entrepreneurship 303 and Management 303.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 306. ETHICS FOR THE ENTREPRENEUR. Students study the ethical decisions business 
professionals face in small business, family business, and corporate business settings. Students analyze 
selected case studies and discuss their analysis with the class. Students will interact with business 
professionals as they study and analyze “living” cases in which one or more of the parties interacts 
with the class. Through these discussions, students will come to understand what constitutes an ethical 
issue and the different philosophical, theological, and practical perspectives from which individuals 
may approach an ethical decision. Students are challenged to begin thinking through and developing 
their own ethical framework as well as to realize the implications of Christian faith in making ethical 
business decisions. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 307. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP. How might one “do good while doing well?” Social 
entrepreneurship is an accelerating field of study and practice in today’s world of shrinking 
governmental services. Students study highly effective non-profit as well as for-profit social 
enterprises to learn the unique aspects of entrepreneurship used to facilitate meaningful social change. 
Practitioners of existing successful social enterprises act as guest lecturers and coaches.   
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 309. E-COMMERCE. This course will provide a foundation for understanding the essential 
components of a successful eCommerce system, including eCommerce strategy, target market 
analysis, search engine optimization, integrated marketing, web usability, payment processing, current 
technologies, data management and fulfillment systems. Case studies and actual business scenarios 
will be examined in detail, and students will have the opportunity to explore practical applications in 
the marketplace by working in teams to design and operate their own eCommerce ventures during the 
semester. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 312. ENTREPRENEURSHIP: MANAGING A GROWING ENTERPRISE. This course 
focuses on the strategy and operations issues involved with managing an existing company beyond the 
startup phase using a global business simulation game. While the course is open to non-
entrepreneurship, business, and accounting majors, it presupposes a basic understanding of business 
functions and language. The core feature of the course is a simulation tied to students’ weekly business 
decisions involving recognizing opportunities, assessing risk, developing resources, and implementing 
a course of action. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 



Entrepreneurship / 113 
 

ENTR 314. ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH. This course 
explores the relationship between entrepreneurial theory and practice and the execution of church 
ministry and mission work, with a particular focus on the ways in which entrepreneurship can be 
employed in the service of Kingdom of God. In addition, the development of “kingdom-minded” 
businesses providing blended value will be explored in detail. Students will learn about need 
identification, opportunity analysis, ministry model development, strategic planning, and reputation 
building in the context of faith-based organizational experience. Concepts related to organizational 
launch, growth, development and sustainability will also be addressed throughout the course. Students 
will apply diagnostic and problem-solving skills to case studies, while identifying entrepreneurial 
strategies to address challenges and opportunities. Students will work throughout the semester in 
project teams with a local church ministry or mission endeavor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 317. STARTUP FOUNDERS’ DILEMMAS. The early decisions made by the founders of 
startup organizations can determine the entire future path of a company. In this course, students will 
explore the types of decisions that founders face and the potential impact of such decisions. They will 
examine case studies of actual startup companies in detail in order to understand how to avoid common 
pitfalls and mistakes. Through the examination of the results of a decade of research, including 
quantitative data on almost ten thousand founders, students will build a strong understanding of these 
types of decisions and how their consequences can make or break organizations. The specific areas of 
study will include pre-founding decisions, founding team dilemmas, hires, and investors.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 319. ENTREPRENEURIAL LEADERSHIP. This course will include a comprehensive 
survey of research around the dimensions of successful entrepreneurial leadership and the development 
of an entrepreneurial leadership assessment tool. Students will have opportunities to hear from, engage 
with, and assess several successful entrepreneurs, further developing their understanding of the 
dimensions of entrepreneurial leadership.  Students will complete a comprehensive assessment of their 
own strengths and weaknesses relative to these dimensions using a variety of assessment tools and will 
prepare and present a personal entrepreneurial leadership development plan with specific strategies to 
leverage strengths and accommodate for shortcomings. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed to analyze 
the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including how these issues began, 
how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will explore copyright law, including fair 
use and public domain, and how it affects sampling, interpolation, and mashups. The course will 
explore contracts related to songwriting, 360° deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal 
documents related to bands, booking, and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new 
means of creating and disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual 
reality, and explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of 
Entrepreneurship 324, Management 324, or Music 324.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is designed as an 
introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest instruction on best practices 
for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this field. Students will have the opportunity 
to learn the fundamental principles involved in the entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music 
business, exploring the structural and functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing 
industry. Particular attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music 
business in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Students may only receive credit 
for one of Entrepreneurship 326, Management 326, or Music 326. Semester course, three hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



114 / Grove City College 

ENTR 328. CONTENT MARKETING. Students will probe the subject of content marketing as a 
core discipline for 21st century entrepreneurs. They will learn essential concepts for strategic content 
development and web-based thought leadership and will acquire skills for use with practical web 
applications. Students will engage in a semester-long project using WordPress to publish Internet 
content for their own website idea, or for a company or organization, employing techniques learned in 
a class. The structure of the class will include two teaching sessions per week and a WordPress lab. 
Students may not receive credit for both Entrepreneurship 328 and Marketing 328. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 

 
ENTR 330. SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMIZATION. Students will explore the fundamental principles 
and best practices in the field of search engine optimization. They will learn and develop the essential 
knowledge and skills required to achieve favorable organic rank in the most important search engines 
and will become familiar with and interact with experts in the industry. Case studies and actual business 
scenarios will be examined in detail. Students will have opportunity to conduct SEO research for small 
businesses and non-profit organizations in a semester-long project. Students may not receive credit for 
both Entrepreneurship 330 and Marketing 330. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 331. ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND ENTERPRISE. An examination of entrepreneurship 
and its role in society. The contribution of creativity, foresight, and other attributes of entrepreneurs to 
the working of both for-profit and not-for profit enterprises will be explored.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENTR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in entrepreneurship. 
Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
entrepreneurship. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 390. STUDIES IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. Studies in areas of entrepreneurship not fully 
covered by regular departmental offerings. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENTR 402. TECH COMMERCIALIZATION STUDIO. In this course, students will examine what 
is needed to take an idea to market while exploring business and revenue models, legal considerations, 
customer validation, and go-to-market strategies through lectures, guest presentations, and working on 
exercises exploring the commercialization of a specific technology. Spring semester only, 1 hour. 
 
ENTR 408. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP PRACTICUM. Using case studies, lectures, and 
hands-on exercises, this course clarifies and illustrates the steps necessary to prepare to launch a social 
enterprise. Topics include the idea generation, business models, organizational structure, staffing, 
governance, funding, and measurement of social impact. Over the course of the semester, students will 
prepare business plans for their own social enterprises. Students may only receive credit for one of 
International Business 408 or Entrepreneurship 408. Spring semester course, three hours. 
 
ENTR 409. DIGITAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP. This course will explore the foundational 
principles and essential components for launching a successful entrepreneurial endeavor on the 
Internet. The course will cover important topics related to Internet Entrepreneurship, including key 
entrepreneurial models, business concept development, opportunity analysis, advanced search 
marketing techniques, understanding user behavior, and creating a viable Internet model for business 
endeavors. Case studies and existing businesses will be examined in detail. Students will have the 
opportunity to study the journeys of successful Internet Entrepreneurs, to hear from experts in the field, 
and to create an original Internet business model in a team with other students. 
 Spring semester course, three hours. 
 
ENTR 420. MENTORING.  This course will help students learn and practice the skills necessary to 
establish and leverage valuable mentor relationships. The course consists of two dimensions: 



Entrepreneurship / 115 
 

classroom study and one-on-one discussions with an experienced business leader. Students learn how 
to identify, establish and work with a mentor, to develop professional networks, to build relationships, 
and to determine the purpose and value of relationships in the world of the entrepreneur. Students will 
be prepared for typical mentorship discussion topics, such as a personal value statement, strengths 
assessment, a personal development plan, ethical leadership, professionalism, meaningful 
internships/summer jobs and finding one’s calling. The course, designed for junior and senior 
Entrepreneurship majors, is open to any upper-division non-majors pending space available. 
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENTR 423. FAMILY, FRANCHISE, AND SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT. An upper-
level course that will focus on the dynamics of owning and operating family-owned businesses, 
franchise businesses and acquired small businesses. Appropriate for students anticipating working in 
a family business, students who are considering acquiring and operating a franchise business or 
students considering acquiring and operating an existing small business. Students explore the key 
management issues facing these types of business today including interpersonal relations, 
succession/transition, business functions of marketing, sales, financial management, etc., in the special 
context of the unique challenges and opportunities of the family-owned, franchise and small business. 
Students will hear from and interact with family, franchise and small business owners who have agreed 
to visit classes and share their experiences.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 424. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT. This course will focus on providing an introduction 
to supply chain management. It will deal with both the logistical activities of demand fulfillment and 
the behavioral aspects of supply chain management. Experiential learning will take place within a 
simulation called, “Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management.” This course will provide 
considerable insight into the management of supply chains. Students will develop disciplines and a 
knowledge of best practices that will facilitate their success in a world where demand and supply 
integration is one of the cornerstones of modern business. Students may not receive credit for both 
Management 424 and Entrepreneurship 424. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview of key music 
marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation for all music marketing 
plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for musicians, including publicity, 
advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital distribution, touring, licensing/synch, and radio. 
Students will learn what companies and partners to work with to reach their core fans, how to 
communicate with them, and the ways to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the internet 
offers to marketers. In addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their vision, 
identify a market need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing plan 
goals, and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price, 
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for one of 
Entrepreneurship 426, Marketing 426, or Music 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 204.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 430. ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE AND VENTURE CAPITAL. This course covers 
financial skills used by entrepreneurs and venture capitalists from the startup of a venture through its 
harvest. This includes a wide variety of topics including the financial elements of a business plan, the 
evaluation of new business opportunities, financial planning, sources of financing at different stages, 
valuation methods, essentials of security law, and methods of harvesting an investment. Prerequisite: 
Finance 301. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in entrepreneurship. 
Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 466. BUSINESS PLANNING. This course provides students from all majors with a vehicle 
for turning their business and non-profit ideas into concrete viable business plans. Either as individuals 
or as teams, students research, create, and present a plan for a viable business or non-profit 
organization. They are coached by the instructor and may also be matched to an appropriate mentor 



116 / Grove City College 

with experience in their area of interest. Successful completion of this course requires students to 
participate in the campus-wide business plan competition held during the spring semester. This course 
satisfies the Writing Intensive requirement for the Entrepreneurship major. Prerequisite: 
Entrepreneurship 430 and a business or non-profit idea. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 467. CORPORATE INNOVATION. In this course, students have a unique opportunity to 
explore real-world innovation concepts in the context of working directly with a corporation. Corporate 
representatives work directly with Grove City College students each semester, providing students with 
business and technology concepts that engage them in terms of research, strategy, innovation and 
business case development. Students from a variety of disciplines collaborate in groups to explore, 
define, strategize, and develop the concept. The course utilizes a service-learning model, and benefits 
from the constant support of representatives of the partner company, who regularly attend classes for 
input and feedback. At the end of the semester, students present their findings and recommendations 
to corporate executives. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 468. INNOVATION FOR IMPACT. Innovation and creativity are widely recognized as 
drivers of success in today’s world for both individuals and organizations. Whether entities are 
nonprofits, startups, small companies, large companies, or governmental units, they are all looking to 
employ people who understand innovation. This course will provide students with an understanding 
of how different entities can innovate using design thinking methodology. As we explore how to 
innovate in concept, we will use that knowledge to attack problems faced by real organizations in our 
own community to explore how applying design thinking methodologies can have true impact on real-
world organizations. Students will emerge from this course with a toolbox of innovation techniques, 
real project work that they can use as examples of their practice of those techniques, and the confidence 
that they are creative and innovative people. Students may not receive credit for both Entrepreneurship 
468 and Marketing 468.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENTR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
entrepreneurship. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENTR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An opportunity for juniors and seniors, 
with a minimum of fifteen hours in their major, to participate in individual job experiences, domestic 
and international, under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member. 
Internship must be within an entrepreneurial organization. Products of the internship will include an 
evaluation by the on-site manager, a log of the internship experience, and a paper describing the 
experience. A comparison-contrast between academic learning and the internship experience will be 
conducted. Prerequisite: Minimum grade point average, permission of department coordinator, and an 
appropriate job site. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
ENTR 488. SEMINAR IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An advanced course for junior and senior 
Entrepreneurship majors to concentrate on specific subject matter to be determined by the instructor. 
Individual research and extensive oral and written reports are required.  
 Semester course; one, two, or three hours. 
 
BUSINESS PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT 
AND MARKETING 
Dr. Carson, Chair; Dr. Biddle, Mr. Butler, Dr. Crute, Ms. Havrilla, Dr. Kocur, Dr. Markley, 
Dr. Powell, Dr. J. Smith. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Blaine, Dr. Coyne, Dr. 
DiStasi, Mr. Lewis, Mr. Miller.   
 
 The mission of the Business Program at Grove City College is to prepare our 
students to become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society 
as a whole. This mission incorporates the following learning outcomes: 



Management and Marketing / 117 
 

1. Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills- Our students will possess the 
knowledge and analytical skills necessary in their professional field. 

2. Communication Skills-Our students will possess the written and verbal 
skills needed to communicate effectively in a business environment. 

3. Ethics-Our students will develop an understanding of business which 
reflects its moral and ethical responsibilities to all potential stakeholders. 

4. Global Perspective-Our students will develop an understanding of the 
global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment. 

 
 Five degree programs are offered in the Department of Management and Marketing: 
Bachelor of Science in Business Analysis, Bachelor of Science in Business Statistics, 
Bachelor of Science in International Business, Bachelor of Science in Management, and 
Bachelor of Science in Marketing. All five programs integrate the international aspects of 
business in course content as it applies to appropriate functional areas of study. 
 In addition to the five majors offered by the Department of Management and 
Marketing, the college also offers degree programs in Accounting, Business Economics, 
Economics, Entrepreneurship, and Finance. For more details on these majors, see the 
listings in this catalog for the Departments of Accounting and Finance, Economics, and 
Entrepreneurship. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Analysis—66-69 
hours 

Business Core (33 hours): 
Accounting 201, 202; Computer Science 141, Finance 301; International Business 
205; Management 103, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Economics Core (6 hours): 
Economics 101, 102. 

Business Analysis Major Requirements (18 hours): 
Management 202, 204, 307, 310, Computer Science 220, and 244. 

Business Analysis Concentration* (9-12 hours): 
Complete one of the following concentrations: 

Accounting: Accounting 301, 302, and three hours from Management 325 or any 
300-400 level Accounting course. 
Analytics: Mathematics 161, 162, and one of Mathematics 214, 232, 261, 262, or 
331. 
Finance: Finance 332, 341, and 440. 
Marketing: Marketing 411, 415, and three hours from International Business 416, 
Management 325, Marketing 330, 370, 411, 417, 468, or 480. 
Operations/Supply Chains: Management 302, 424, and three hours from 
Management 311, 325, 450, 457, 480, and International Business 417. 
Software: Nine hours from Computer Science 222 or higher Computer Science 
courses and/or any DSCI courses. 
Sports Management: Management 213, and six hours from Management 313, 
325, 480 (max three hours), Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, or 305. 
 
*Note: Students who complete the requirements for a second major in Accounting, 
Business Economics, Computer Science, Economics, Entrepreneurship, Finance, 
International Business, Management, Marketing, or Mathematics are exempt from 
the Business Analysis Concentration requirement. 

 
 



118 / Grove City College 

Courses that count in the Business Analysis major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “COMP”, “DSCI”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, 
“MATH”, “MNGT” prefix, excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 
2.00 is required to graduate. 
 

The Business Analysis major prepares graduates for careers in business analysis, data 
analysis, project leadership, business management, market research, financial analysis, and 
management analysis. 

 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Statistics—67-70 
hours 

Business Statistics Core (46 hours): 
Computer Science 141, 220, 244; Data Science 215; Management 201, 202, 212, 
314; Mathematics 161, 162, 214, 261, 331, and 332. 

Business Core (12 hours): 
Accounting 201; Finance 301; Management 103; and Marketing 104. 

Business Statistics Concentration* (9-12 hours): 
Complete one of the following concentrations: 

Accounting: Accounting 202, 301, 302, and three hours from Management 325 
or any 300-400 level Accounting course. 
Business Analysis: Management 204, 307, and 310. 
Economics: Economics 101, 102, and three hours of Economics courses. 
Finance: Finance 341, Mathematics 232, and three hours from Finance 332, 435, 
436, 440, 480, or Management 325. 
Marketing: Marketing 411, 415, and three hours from Marketing 330, 370, 417, 
468, 480, International Business 416, or Management 325. 
Operations/Supply Chain: Management 204, 424, and three hours from 
Management 302, 307, 310, 311, 325, 450, 457, 480, and International Business 
417. 
Software: Nine hours from Computer Science 222 or higher Computer Science 
courses and/or any DSCI courses. 
Sports Analytics: Management 213, and six hours from Management 313, 325, 
480 (max three hours), Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, or 305. 
 
*Note: Students who complete the requirements for a second major in Accounting, 
Business Economics, Computer Science, Economics, Entrepreneurship, Finance, 
International Business, Management, Marketing, or Mathematics are exempt from 
the Business Statistics Concentration requirement. 
 

Courses that count in the Business Statistics major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “COMP”, “DSCI”, “MNGT”, “MATH” prefix, excluding MNGT 
106. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 The Business Statistics major prepares graduates for careers in statistics in applied 
business contexts.  Job titles include market researcher, financial risk analyst, investment 
analyst, business logistics specialist, management analyst, supply chain analyst, statistician, 
and others. 
 
 
 



Management and Marketing / 119 
 

Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Human Resource 
Management—67 hours 

Business Core (33 hours): 
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
111, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Math/Economics Courses (10 hours): 
Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161.  
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

Human Resource Major Core (15 hours): 
Management 433, 457, 458, 462, and 465. 

Human Resource Major Electives (9 hours): 
Choose three courses from Management 110, 304, 307, 311, 475, 480 (max 3 hours), 
Accounting 303, Communication Arts 225, Psychology 208, or Psychology 310. 

 
Courses that count in the Marketing major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, excluding 
MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 The Human Resource Management major prepares graduates to pursue a career as a 
human resource professional in any form of organization including both for-profit and not-
for-profit contexts.  Students will be prepared to be a human resource generalist in smaller 
firms, as well as to occupy specialist roles in functional areas such as recruiting, 
compensation, benefits, training, and risk and insurance in larger firms.    
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in International Business—82 
hours 

Business Core (33 hours): 
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
111, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Math/Economics Courses (10 hours): 
Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161.  
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

 International Business Core (9 hours): 
Choose three courses from International Business 408, 416, 445 (required for 
Management and Marketing concentrations); Economics 202, 206, 303; 
Entrepreneurship 307, 312; or Finance 462 (required for Accounting and Finance 
concentrations). With advance Department Chair approval, Accounting, 
Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Marketing, or Management 390 
may count toward this requirement. Note: Students completing the Entrepreneurship 
Concentration may not count ENTR 312 toward the International Business Core. 

 Business Concentration (12 hours): 
Complete one of the following six concentrations: 

Accounting: Accounting 301, 303, 321, and any 300-400- level accounting 
course. 
Economics: Economics 301, 302; and any two Economics courses. Note: 
Economics 202, 206, and 303 cannot be used to fulfill both the concentration and 
international business core requirements. 
Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurship 312, 430, and 466; and one course from 
Entrepreneurship 309, 318, or 423. 



120 / Grove City College 

Finance: Finance 332, 440; and two courses from Finance 334, 341, 435, or 436. 
Management: Management 457; and three courses from Management 302, 304, 
307, 311, 433, 450, 458, or 475. 
Marketing: Marketing 411, 419; and two courses from International Business 
416, 417, Management 424; Marketing 315, 316, 412, 415, 417, or 420. Note: 
International Business 416 and 417 cannot be used to fulfill both the concentration 
and international business core requirements. 

    Global Emphasis (6 hours): 
Choose two courses from Communication Arts 225; any Global Studies (GOBL) 
course; or any non-United States History or Political Science course. 

Foreign Language Concentration (12 hours): 
Choose one of the following three options (for placement and course sequencing, 
consult with the Department of Modern Languages): 

French: One course from French 301, 305, or 340; French 307; and two 200-300-
level French courses. 
Spanish: Spanish 303 and three 200-300-level Spanish courses. 
Other: Twelve credits in a single modern language with the approval of the Chair 
of the Department of Modern Language. 

 Foreign Study Requirement: 
At least three hours must be earned outside the United States through an approved 
study abroad program (ABRD 300), Grove City College travel course, or Grove City 
College international internship. 
 

Courses that count in the International Business major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “FREN”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT”, 
“SPAN” prefix, COMM 225, ECON 303, GOBL 300, excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 
105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 The International Business major focuses on the international context of business and 
is designed to prepare students for participation in worldwide business activity. This 
program combines substantial preparation in international business, business, modern 
languages, and other related international courses. International Business majors are 
strongly encouraged to take additional advanced courses in culture, literature, and grammar 
in their chosen language of study and to study an additional foreign language.  
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Management—67 hours 

Business Core (33 hours): 
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
111, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Math/Economics Courses (10 hours): 
Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161.  
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

Management Major Core (9 hours): 
Management 457, 475, and one course from Management 307, 311, 424, 433, 458, 
or 480*. 

Management Concentration (15 hours): 
Complete one of the following four concentrations: 

Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurship 101, 201; and nine hours from the 
following: Entrepreneurship 307, 309, 312, 314, 317, 319, 466; Management 433; 
or Entrepreneurship or Management 480* (max three hours). 



Management and Marketing / 121 
 

Human Resources: Management 465 and 12 hours from the following (minimum 
of nine hours of ACCT and MNGT courses): Management 304, 307, 311, 433, 
458, 480* (max three hours); Accounting 303; Psychology 208, 214, 310; 
Sociology 208; Social Work 342 or 382. 
Operations/Supply Chain: Management 204, 302, 424, and six hours from  
Accounting 303; International Business 417, 445; Marketing 316, 412, 417; 
Management 307, 310, 311, 325, 433, 450, 458, 480* (max three hours; 
Communication Arts 104, 303, 459; Psychology 214; Social Work 382; 
Mechanical Engineering 210 or 303. 
Sports Management: Management 213, 313, 480 (3 hours); and seven hours from 
the following: Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, 305; Management 307, 311, 325, 
433; Marketing 316, or 420. 

 
*Note: The course chosen to complete the Management Core Elective cannot be used 

to fulfill a Management Concentration Elective. In addition, students choosing to complete 
an internship experience for both the Management Major Core elective and management 
concentration may not use a single internship experience to fulfill both requirements. In 
order to receive internship credit in both areas, students must complete two 3-credit 
internships, recommended during the summer following the sophomore and junior years. A 
maximum of six internship credits can be applied toward the 128 required for graduation. 

 
Courses that count in the Management major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, 
excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 

The Management major prepares graduates for the modern challenges facing managers 
in many types of organizations.  These include, but are not limited to, for-profit, not-for-
profit, and governmental organizations of any size.  Graduates pursue careers a variety of 
organizational contexts including retail, consulting, financial services, manufacturing, arts 
and entertainment and many more. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Marketing—67 hours 

Business Core (33 hours): 
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
111, 201, 214, 303, 486; and Marketing 104. 

Math/Economics Courses (10 hours): 
Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161.  
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

Marketing Major Core (12 hours): 
Marketing 315, 411, 415, and 419. 

Marketing Major Electives (12 hours): 
Choose four courses from International Business 416, 417, Marketing 316, 328, 330, 
412, 416, 417, 420, 426, 468, 480, or Marketing 390 with department chair approval. 

 
Courses that count in the Marketing major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, 
excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 Marketing is the broad link between organizations and the marketplace. Every 
organization must understand both customers and competitors in order to survive. 
Accordingly, marketing as a discipline comprises diverse career paths, including marketing 



122 / Grove City College 

management, marketing communication, design, customer experience, digital marketing, 
logistics, sales, and market intelligence. Students who major in Marketing and wish to 
further specialize are encouraged to consider adding a related minor (or taking additional 
courses) in design, sales, analytics, digital marketing, entrepreneurship or communication. 
 
Writing, Speaking and Information Literacy Intensive Courses 
 It is essential for students majoring in the Department of Management and Marketing 
to possess strong writing, speaking, and information literacy (knowing how to locate, 
analyze, and use information in decision-making) skills in preparation for careers in 
business/accounting or graduate studies. The curriculum requirements specifically designed 
to develop these skills include Management 214, Business, Ethics, and Society and 
Management 486, Business Policy and Strategy. Please see course descriptions that follow 
for more information. 
 
Course Sequencing for the Business Core 
 For all majors within the Department of Management and Marketing, the following 
business core courses applicable to the major must be completed before the beginning of 
the junior year and prior to registering for any 400-level course in the Department: 
Accounting 201, 202; Management 103, 111, 201, 214; Marketing 104; Economics 101, 
102; and Mathematics 141 or 161. International Business 205 and Finance 301 must be 
taken before the beginning of the senior year. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Business (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Business Program majors only)  
 A minor in Business shall consist of Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; Management 
103, 201; and Marketing 104. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Business Analysis (18 hours) 
 A minor in Business Analysis shall consist of Management 201, 202, 310; Computer 
Science 141, 244; and three hours from Management 204, 307, or Computer Science 155. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Digital Marketing (18 hours) 
 A minor in Digital Marketing shall consist of Marketing 104, 315, 328, 330; 
Entrepreneurship 309; and three hours from Management 325, Entrepreneurship 470, or 
Marketing 480. Note: Students wishing to receive credit for Marketing 480 – Internship in 
Digital Marketing – and internship credit toward a Marketing major elective may not use 
the same internship experience to count for both. Rather, two separate internships must be 
completed, usually in the summers following the sophomore and junior years. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Human Resource Management (18 hours)  
(Restricted to non-Human Resource Management and non-Management majors only)  
 A minor in Human Resource Management shall consist of Management 103, 433, 457, 
458, 462, and 465 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in International Business (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-International Business majors only)  
 A minor in International Business shall consist of International Business 205, 445; six 
hours of 200-level or higher foreign language courses; and two courses from International 
Business 416, 417, Economics 206, 303, 390, or Entrepreneurship 307.  
 
 



Management and Marketing / 123 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in Management (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Management majors only)  
 A minor in Management shall consist of Management 103, 457, 475; and three courses 
from Management 302, 304, 307, 325, 424, 433, 450, 458, 464, 465, or 480. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Marketing (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Marketing majors only)  
 A minor in Marketing shall consist of Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, 419; and one course 
from Marketing 316, 412, 417, 420, or 480. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Sales (18 hours) 
 A minor in Sales shall consist of Marketing 104, 316, 416; Management 311; and six 
hours from Management 213, 307; Communication Arts 104; Marketing 412, or 480. Note: 
Students wishing to receive credit for Marketing 480 – Internship in Sales – and internship 
credit toward a Marketing major elective may not use the same internship experience to 
count for both. Rather, two separate internships must be completed, usually in the summers 
following the sophomore and junior years. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Sports Management (18 hours) 
(Restricted to non-Management majors only)  
 A minor in Sports Management shall consist of Management 103, 213, 313, 480 (3 cr); 
and seven additional hours from Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, 305; Marketing 316, 420; 
Management 307, 311, 325, or 433. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS (INBS) 
INBS 205. GLOBAL BUSINESS ISSUES. Designed to acquaint the student with the dynamic 
environment in which businesses must operate globally, including the challenges posed by political 
risk, cultural barriers, and differences in economic and legal systems, as well as those aspects of 
international business management not associated with traditional functional areas including 
international trade; foreign currency transactions; theory and institutions; country analysis; and 
international business strategy. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing or instructor permission.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
INBS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in international business. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
INBS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
international business. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor 
are required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
INBS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in international business. 
Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
INBS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
international business. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



124 / Grove City College 

INBS 390. STUDIES IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS. Studies in areas of international business 
not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Semester course, three hours. 
 
INBS 408. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP PRACTICUM. Using case studies, lectures, and 
hands-on exercises, this course clarifies and illustrates the steps necessary to prepare to launch a social 
enterprise. Topics include the idea generation, business models, organizational structure, staffing, 
governance, funding, and measurement of social impact. Over the course of the semester, students will 
prepare business plans for their own social enterprises. Students may only receive credit for only one 
of International Business 408 or Entrepreneurship 408. Semester course, three hours. 
 
INBS 416. INTERNATIONAL MARKETING. An introduction to marketing management on a 
global scale including social and cultural dimensions of marketing; economic environments; political 
and financial risks; cross-cultural consumer behavior; and international product and channel decisions. 
Prerequisite: International Business 205. Semester course, three hours. 
 
INBS 417. GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS. An understanding of supply chains is essential to the global 
marketplace including social and cultural dimensions of business practices in international economies; 
international logistics; political and financial risks; cross-cultural vendor interactions; and international 
product and channel decisions.  This course will examine international supply chains and how various 
functional organizations including Marketing, Finance, Human Resources must interact with global 
supply chains in order to meet their business objectives. Three hours 
 
INBS 445. INTERNATIONAL TRADE. This course surveys policies and international business 
practices of international trade, including coverage of international logistics, customs and tariffs, 
export control law, international contracts, resolution of trade disputes, and international trade 
organizations. Prerequisite: International Business 205. Semester course, three hours. 
 
INBS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in international business. 
Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
INBS 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
international business. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
INBS 480. INTERNSHIP IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS. This is an opportunity for students 
to participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and a 
Management and Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships take place during the 
summer months. Students will be graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with a 
written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the freshman year 
of study.  Semester course, one to six hours. 

MANAGEMENT (MNGT) 
MNGT 103. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT. An introduction to the theory and practice of 
management. Students are introduced to management history, ethics, global issues, and other 
challenges. The four basic managerial functions of planning, organizing, leading, and controlling are 
explored in detail. Throughout, attention is given to a Christian perspective on these topics.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 106. FUNDAMENTALS OF BUSINESS. A general introduction to the organizational 
environment and operations of contemporary businesses. The course examines the United States 
business system and how it interacts with global systems; the basic management functions of planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling; entrepreneurship and small businesses; marketing processes and 
consumer behavior; managing operations and information; and financial management. Integrated into 
these topics are Christian principles that should guide ethical business practices.  
 Semester course, three hours. 



Management and Marketing / 125 
 

MNGT 110. EXCEL. Nearly all businesses require new hires to be proficient in Excel. Students will 
learn how to use Excel in a variety of business fields. This course culminates in a final exam that, if 
successful, will result in students achieving Microsoft certification in Excel. An additional fee is 
charged for this course. Online only, three hours. 
 
MNGT 111. BUSINESS COMPUTER APPLICATIONS. This course provides business majors 
with instruction and practical exercises using Microsoft Office to solve business problems. It integrates 
applications of Microsoft Office into the business environment in such a way that students learn to use 
the software to prepare reports, design oral presentations, collaborate with one another, and utilize 
spreadsheets to organize information and summarize data. Business, accounting, financial and 
scientific problems and applications are emphasized. This course must be taken in the freshman or 
sophomore year. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 120. ADVANCED EXCEL. Nearly all businesses require new hires to be proficient in 
business uses of Excel. Students will build on the Excel knowledge acquired in Management 110 and 
demonstrate advanced proficiency. Students will utilize advanced techniques in Excel (macros, nested 
functions, PivotTables, and PivotCharts, for example) to answer real-world organizational questions. 
This course culminates in a final exam that, if successful, will result in students achieving the Microsoft 
Expert certification in Excel. Prerequisite: Management 110 or MOS Basic Excel Certification. An 
additional fee is charged for this course. Online only, three hours. 
 
MNGT 201. BUSINESS STATISTICS. A course designed to familiarize the student with basic 
statistical techniques used in the management decision-making process, including probability 
distributions, descriptive statistics, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, and parametric and 
nonparametric hypothesis testing. Students may only receive credit for one of Management 201, 
Mathematics 201, or Psychology 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 202. ADVANCED BUSINESS STATISTICS. Based on principles learned in the first 
business statistics course, this course will study techniques for creating effective predictive models. 
Topics include simple regression models, multiple regression models, model building, model analysis, 
time series and forecasting, and experimental design. Students will learn the basics of statistical 
software and begin to understand some concepts behind machine learning. Prerequisite: Management 
201, Mathematics 201, or Psychology 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
 
MNGT 204. OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT. Introduction to the design, planning, control and 
improvement of business operations for both goods-producing and service-rendering organizations. 
Organizational and management impacts resulting from product development, process management, 
and supply chain management is explored in detail. Prerequisite: Management 202. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 212. DATA ANALYSIS RESEARCH METHODS. This course examines the fundamentals 
of research approaches and methods of statistical sciences. The course will explore the entire research 
task including problem definition, literature review, experimental design, data collection, analysis, and 
communication of conclusion. This course will have the opportunity to culminate in basic research 
posters and presentations for local and/or national conferences. Prerequisite: Management 202.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 213 PRINCIPLES OF SPORTS MANAGEMENT AND MARKETING. This course 
explores the basic concepts and principles of the sport and recreation business. Emphases will be on 
the principles of management, marketing, finance, and economics applied to sports management and 
marketing. Topics include event and venue management, legal considerations, sales, promotion, 
revenue generation, branding, and public relations.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 214. BUSINESS, ETHICS, AND SOCIETY. An examination of various ethical and moral 
issues arising in contemporary business and its activities which affect our society and the world. This 
course also examines the nature and purpose of economic life and contemporary business, especially 



126 / Grove City College 

from the Christian perspective. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI) and Information 
Literacy (IL) requirements for all business majors. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing and Business 
Program majors only.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management topics. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised management-
related research. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 302. LEAN MANAGEMENT. An examination of the general theory of lean management 
and the twenty keys to workplace improvement. Topics include just-in-time, supplier development, 
and skill versatility. Students completing this course may choose to sit for a (fee based) Lean Six Sigma 
certification exam. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 303. BUSINESS LAW. A survey of law crucial to the conduct of business, including an 
introduction to the nature of law, legal reasoning, and dispute resolution as well as to the law of 
contracts, torts, crimes, agency, business associations, and intellectual property. Students may not 
receive credit for both Management 303 and Entrepreneurship 303. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 304. LEGAL ENVIRONMENT OF BUSINESS. Managers need to be prepared to 
understand and navigate the complex world of federal and state regulation on topics such as 
employment law, antitrust law, environmental law, consumer protection law, internet law, intellectual 
property law, and securities law. This course not only provides a thorough consideration of the 
applicable law, but also addresses the ethical principles, fundamental values, and policy issues relevant 
to each topic. Prerequisite: Management 303 or Entrepreneurship 303. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 307. PROJECT TEAMS AND LEADERSHIP. This course provides the student with team-
building skills, team dynamics, and project management skills in alignment with prevailing project 
management methodology. Students completing this course may choose to sit for a (fee based) CAPM 
certification exam offered through PMI. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 310. BUSINESS DASHBOARDING. This course will study techniques for creating effective 
visual stories via dashboards. Topics include visual story telling models, exploratory data analysis, 
visualization software, interaction techniques, graphical perception, color, animation, dimensional 
data, temporal visualization, and text visualization. Prerequisite: Management 202; corequisites: 
Accounting 202 and Marketing 104. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 311. NEGOTIATION. Negotiation is the art and science of securing agreements between 
two or more parties who are interdependent and who are seeking to maximize their outcomes. The 
central issues of this course deal with understanding the behavior of individuals, groups, and 
organizations in the context of competitive situations. It is designed to complement the technical and 
diagnostic skills learned in other courses, with a basic premise being that while a manager needs 
analytical skills to discover optimal solutions to problems, a broad array of negotiation skills is needed 
for these solutions to be accepted and implemented. Considerable emphasis will be placed on 
simulations, role-playing, and cases. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 313 SPORT AND EVENT MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM.  This course is designed to 
introduce students to the logistics of sport event and venue management.  Student will obtain hands 
on experience in planning, organizing, marketing, managing risk, managing facilities, working with 
stakeholders, and other related activities in the course of administering an actual sporting event. 
Prerequisites: Management 213 and junior standing. Semester course, two hours. 
 



Management and Marketing / 127 
 

MNGT 314. ADVANCED ANALYTICAL METHODS. This course will explore in detail how to 
conduct non-linear analysis. Optimization techniques will focus on non-integer as well as integer-
programming problems. Stochastic modeling techniques will be presented by way of coding systems 
of non-normal distributions. Queueing theory will also be studied. Students will have the opportunity 
to code basic simulations. Prerequisite: Mathematics 214. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 323. ADVANCED BUSINESS LAW. Exploration of advanced legal topics important for 
business and accounting including negotiable instruments; agency; secured transactions and creditors’ 
rights; bankruptcy; forms of business associations; securities law; and real property. Prerequisite: 
Management 303.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed to analyze 
the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including how these issues began, 
how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will explore copyright law, including fair 
use and public domain, and how it affects sampling, interpolation, and mashups. The course will 
explore contracts related to songwriting, 360° deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal 
documents related to bands, booking, and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new 
means of creating and disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual 
reality, and explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of ENTR 
324, MNGT 324, or MUSI 324.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MNGT 325. MANAGERIAL PERSPECTIVES IN BUSINESS ANALYSIS. This course focuses 
on developing a managerial understanding of the strategic role data can play in a cross-functional 
organization. Using lecture, case analysis, and hands-on exercises, this course will prepare students for 
entry into a data driven business world by highlighting fundamental analytical tools, outlining how 
technology enables and empowers business decision making, and by exploring cutting edge trends in 
business analytics and decision making. Additionally, legal and ethical issues raised by a data-driven 
business world will be discussed from a Christian perspective. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. 
Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is designed as an 
introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest instruction on best practices 
for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this field. Students will have the opportunity 
to learn the fundamental principles involved in the entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music 
business, exploring the structural and functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing 
industry. Particular attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music 
business in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Entrepreneurship 326, 
Management 326, or Music 326. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management topics. 
Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised management-
related research. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 390. STUDIES IN MANAGEMENT. Studies in areas of management not fully covered by 
regular departmental offerings. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 424. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT. The focus of this course is to provide an 
introduction to supply chain management. It will deal with both the logistical activities of demand 
fulfillment and the behavioral aspects of supply chain management. Experiential learning will take 
place within a simulation called, “Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management.” This course will 
provide considerable insight into the management of supply chains. Students will develop disciplines 
and a knowledge of best practices that will facilitate their success in a world where demand and supply 



128 / Grove City College 

integration is one of the cornerstones of modern business. Students may not receive credit for both 
Management 424 and Entrepreneurship 424. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 433. RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE. An introduction to and study of risk and 
liability exposures that face businesses and individuals. Topics include risk management techniques, 
the insurance industry, and employee benefits packages. Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 450. QUALITY MANAGEMENT. An examination of the philosophies, principles, and 
techniques used to study, gain control, and improve processes. Topics include the thought leaders, Six 
Sigma, tools of QC, designed experiments, and the Baldrige Award criteria. Prerequisite: Management 
201 or equivalent. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 457. HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT. This course examines the principles, 
policies and practices of human resources important for being an effective manager in today’s 
organizations. Human resource topics include EEOC and legal guidelines, recruitment, selection, 
training, compensation, employee appraisal, and discipline systems. Prerequisite: Management 103 
and junior or senior standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 458. ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR. An examination of individual, interpersonal, and 
organizational processes in contemporary organizations emphasizing motivation, job design, 
performance management, group and team dynamics, leadership, and decision-making. Also covered 
are organizational culture, design, and change management. The course emphasizes contemporary 
theories and trends in organizational structures and processes. The course includes extensive use of 
case studies and applications of theories to management practice. Prerequisite: Management 103.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management topics. 
Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 462. EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS. This course covers the breadth 
and depth of issues related to the professional management of employee benefits and compensation 
systems.  Human resource policies and practices will be discussed.  Applicable law, regulation, and 
case law will be covered.  Specific topics include retirement plans, health coverage, paid time off, 
salary and hourly pay systems, and additional incentive practices. Prerequisite: Management 457. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 465. ADVANCED HUMAN RESOURCES. This course provides an in-depth examination 
of advance topics in human resource management. Emphasized topics include labor relations and 
collective bargaining, recruitment and retention strategies, employee selection, performance appraisal, 
and legal issues.  Taught as a seminar course. Prerequisite: Management 457.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised management-
related research. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MNGT 475. LEADERSHIP. A study of historical and current perspectives on leadership theory and 
practice with the incorporation of Christian principles. Leadership theories are made practical through 
lectures, class activities, case studies, guest speakers, and assignments. Students will learn more about 
their strengths through assessments and self-reflection. The course is treated as a seminar, and thus 
focused on discussion and many student-led activities. Prerequisites: Management 103 and junior or 
senior standing; or instructor permission.   Semester course, three hours. 
 
MNGT 478. SEMINAR IN LIFE MANAGEMENT. This seminar is intended to provide senior 
students with practical advice for navigating the transition to post-college life. Finances, risk, health, 



Management and Marketing / 129 
 

professional responsibilities and interpersonal relationships are important aspects of life that need to 
be managed. These and other related topics will be addressed in the seminar. 
 Senior Standing, one hour. 
MNGT 480. INTERNSHIP IN MANAGEMENT. This is an opportunity for students to participate 
in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and a Management and 
Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months. 
Students will be graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with a written paper and 
journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the freshman year of study. 
 Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
MNGT 486. BUSINESS POLICY AND STRATEGY. This course presents the basic concepts and 
tools used in strategic business analysis and applies those concepts and tools to the formulation, 
implementation, and evaluation of organizational business strategy. This course also represents the 
Grove City College Business program’s capstone course. As such it will integrate the knowledge and 
skills gained across previous business coursework and help the student to form a total business 
perspective, including the application of Christian values in the workplace. This course satisfies the 
Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement in the Business Program. Prerequisite: Senior status; majoring in 
the Departments of Accounting & Finance and/or Management and Marketing.  
 Semester course, three hours. 

MARKETING (MARK) 
MARK 104. PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING. An introduction to the terms and concepts used in 
marketing.  Study focuses on all aspects of the marketing process, including market analysis and 
information, consumer and business buying behavior, marketing strategy, the marketing mix, and legal 
and ethical issues. Discussion covers global, digital, and sustainability implications. The goal is to 
understand key basic marketing concepts and be able to practically apply knowledge to marketing 
decisions. Discussion also incorporates the application of Christian values in the workplace.  
 Semester course, three hours.   
 
MARK 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised marketing 
research. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 315. DIGITAL MARKETING. This course provides an in-depth study of the rapidly 
growing and evolving area of digital marketing. In addition to understanding the basic components of 
digital marketing, students will focus on learning how specific elements of digital marketing, including 
websites, social media, and mobile technology can be utilized as integrated parts of a comprehensive 
marketing plan. Lecture, case studies, guest speakers, and in-class exercises will be utilized to provide 
understanding and relevancy of this key component within the marketing discipline. In addition, 
students will also explore ethical issues related to marketing in a digital world from a Christian 
perspective. Prerequisite: Marketing 104. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 316. SALES. This course focuses on professional selling from a client-focused, non-
manipulative sales perspective. Students will learn and apply the principles of professional selling and 
the role of sales management through lecture, access to guest speakers in the sales discipline, and 
hands-on activities. Students will also explore ethical issues found in the sales discipline from a 
Christian perspective. Prerequisite: Marketing 104.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 328. CONTENT MARKETING. Students will probe the subject of content marketing as a 
core discipline for 21st century entrepreneurs. They will learn essential concepts for strategic content 
development and web-based thought leadership and will acquire skills for use with practical web 
applications. Students will engage in a semester-long project using WordPress to publish Internet 



130 / Grove City College 

content for a company or organization, employing techniques learned in a class. The structure of the 
class will include two teaching sessions per week and a WordPress lab. Students may not receive credit 
for both Marketing 328 and Entrepreneurship 328.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 330. SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMIZATION. Students will explore the fundamental 
principles and best practices in the field of search engine optimization. They will learn and develop 
the essential knowledge and skills required to achieve favorable organic rank in the most important 
search engines and will become familiar with and interact with experts in the industry. Case studies 
and actual business scenarios will be examined in detail. Students will have opportunity to conduct 
SEO research for small businesses and non-profit organizations in semester-long team projects with 
other students. Students may not receive credit for both Marketing 330 and Entrepreneurship 330. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics. 
Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised marketing 
research. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 390. STUDIES IN MARKETING. Studies in areas of marketing not fully covered by regular 
departmental offerings. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 411. MARKETING RESEARCH. An introduction to the major areas of marketing research 
and information from a managerial perspective. Students will learn how to determine when and what 
type of market research to do, what objectives to pursue, and how to assess market research learnings.   
Incorporating market research within the context of market information, this course explores problem 
definition, research design, questionnaire development, sampling, interviewing, analysis, and 
reporting. It incorporates key ethical issues and application of Christian values in the workplace.  
Prerequisites: Management 201, Marketing 104, and senior standing.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 412. RETAIL MANAGEMENT. An in-depth look at the dynamic field of retail marketing. 
A balanced blend of theory and application (using current examples) will help students learn how to 
analyze and develop effective retailing strategies. Emphasized topics include buying, merchandising, 
and selling functions; inventory, financial, and employee management; and targeting, location and 
promotion objectives. Study also investigates inherent ethical issues and discusses how Christian 
principles can be applied.  Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and junior or senior standing.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 415. STRATEGIC MARKETING. This capstone marketing course utilizes business course 
work to date and enables students to demonstrate strategic marketing mastery and business application 
in three critical areas: 1) role of marketing in the development of successful strategies, 2) marketing 
opportunity analysis, and 3) developing, implementing, and managing strategic marketing programs.   
It applies marketing principles to real world situations through case study analysis and/or project 
applications, discussions, presentations, and exposure to business professionals. While focused on 
marketing, discussion will incorporate financial and management strategies. It also incorporates key 
ethical issues and application of Christian values in the workplace. Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and 
senior standing.    Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 416. SALES MANAGEMENT. This course is focused on the principles, methods, and issues 
found in professional, business-to-business sales force management. Students will gain exposure to 
and experience with the responsibilities of a sales manager and an understanding of the strategic role 
played by sales within an organization. Prerequisite: Marketing 316. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MARK 417. NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT. This course 
encompasses a comprehensive study of the new product development and management process. It is 



Management and Marketing / 131 
 

intended for students who are interested in learning how new products and services are developed and 
managed. Since New Product Development is a cross functional discipline, the content is relevant for 
students preparing to lead an organization to understand customer needs, to innovate and translate 
those needs to new products and services, and to profitably grow a business. It incorporates case study 
analysis and/or project applications, discussions, presentations, and exposure to business professionals. 
Discussion incorporates key ethical issues and the application of Christian values in the workplace. 
Prerequisite: Marketing 104.   Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 419. CONSUMER BEHAVIOR. An examination of consumer decision-making in the 
marketplace, emphasizing the effects of internal factors such as motivation, personality, learning, 
emotion, and attitudes; external factors such as culture, subcultures, reference groups, demographics, 
and social status; and the steps in the consumer decision-making process. The course incorporates an 
examination of what it means to be both a Christian and a consumer. Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and 
junior or senior standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 420. ADVERTISING. A critical exploration of the purposes and functions of advertising, 
public relations and sales promotion in the growth and development of the global market economy. 
Study focuses on the basic principles of researching, creating, and executing promotional campaigns, 
and includes an examination of corporate responsibility and Christian ethics in advertising. 
Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and junior or senior standing.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview of key 
music marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation for all music 
marketing plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for musicians, including 
publicity, advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital distribution, touring, licensing/synch, 
and radio. Students will learn what companies and partners to work with to reach their core fans, how 
to communicate with them, and the ways to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the 
internet offers to marketers. In addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their 
vision, identify a market need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing 
plan goals, and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price, 
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for one of 
Entrepreneurship 426, Marketing 426, or Music 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 104.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MARK 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics. 
Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 468. INNOVATION FOR IMPACT. Innovation and creativity are widely recognized as 
drivers of success in today’s world for both individuals and organizations. Whether entities are 
nonprofits, startups, small companies, large companies, or governmental units, they are all looking to 
employ people who understand innovation. This course will provide students with an understanding 
of how different entities can innovate using design thinking methodology. As we explore how to 
innovate in concept, we will use that knowledge to attack problems faced by real organizations in our 
own community to explore how applying design thinking methodologies can have true impact on real-
world organizations. Students will emerge from this course with a toolbox of innovation techniques, 
real project work that they can use as examples of their practice of those techniques, and the confidence 
that they are creative and innovative people. Students may not receive credit for both Marketing 468 
and Entrepreneurship 468.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MARK 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised marketing 
research. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MARK 480. INTERNSHIP IN MARKETING. This is an opportunity for students to participate in 
a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and a Management and 
Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months. 



132 / Grove City College 

Students will be graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with a written paper and 
journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the freshman year of study. 
 Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY 
Dr. Augspurger, Chair; Dr. Cramer, Dr. DiStasi, Dr. Falcetta, Dr. Guevara, Dr. T. 
Homan, Dr. Kriley, Dr. Shaw, Dr. Wong. 
 

CHEMISTRY DEPARTMENT MISSION STATEMENT, 
OBJECTIVES, AND OUTCOMES 

 The Department of Chemistry is traditional in its approach to the discipline of 
chemistry and offers a rigorous and well-balanced curriculum. This provides the student 
with a strong preparation for graduate studies and/or a career in chemistry. The department 
faculty expertise covers all major areas of chemistry. A variety of research experiences are 
available to majors through ongoing faculty research programs. In addition, the department 
attempts to instill in its students an awareness of the beauty and design in nature that reflects 
the creative hand of God. 
 
 There are four separate majors offered within the department: 

• Chemistry: The traditional chemistry major provides a strong preparation for 
graduate school or employment in the chemical industry. 

• Biochemistry: This major provides a strong preparation for graduate or 
professional schools or for employment in biochemical, molecular biology or 
genetics industry. 

• Chemistry Secondary Education Certification: This major prepares the student 
for teaching chemistry at the secondary school level. It is a program that combines 
a traditional chemistry curriculum with a number of education courses. 

• Chemistry and General Science Secondary Education Certification: This is 
essentially the same as Chemistry Secondary Education major. These students, 
however, in addition to all the chemistry and education courses will take 
Astronomy and either Geology or Environmental Science. This will qualify them 
for General Science certification. 

 
 Success in the chemical profession requires the ability to search the chemical literature 
and chemical databases and to effectively communicate that information in written and oral 
form. Chemists need to be proficient with software designed to operate instruments, analyze 
data and present results. The Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI) and 
Information Literacy (IL) courses in the Chemistry Department are designed to fulfill these 
academic and professional requirements. 
 
Chemistry Department Program Objectives 
 Graduates will be prepared with the knowledge and technical skills to successfully 
pursue career paths in the chemical industry, secondary education, chemistry graduate 
studies or other professional programs. 
 Graduates will be prepared to display critical thinking and problem-solving skills to 
enable them to learn, grow and be effective throughout their professional careers. 
 Graduates will gain knowledge and develop skills within the context of a Christian 
worldview, including the Christian foundations of science and the practice of chemistry, 
both ethical and in conduct, according to Christian principles. 
 



Chemistry / 133 
 

 
Chemistry Department Program Outcomes 
 Graduates of the Chemistry Department will demonstrate: 

1. Knowledge in the areas of general, analytical, organic, physical, inorganic 
chemistry and biochemistry according to ACS standards. 

2. An ability to apply chemical principles and knowledge to solving chemical 
problems. 

3. Knowledge of the mathematical and physical basis of chemical theories. 
4. An ability to use laboratory techniques and skills to effectively conduct 

experiments and interpret results. 
5. An ability to accurately maintain a laboratory notebook. 
6. Proficiency in the operation of modern instrumentation and the ability to analyze 

and interpret instrumental data. 
7. An ability to search the chemical literature as well as read and comprehend content 

in professional chemistry journals. 
8. An ability to effectively communicate chemical information in written and oral 

forms according to ACS guidelines. 
9. Knowledge of the foundations and the practice of science from a Christian 

perspective. 
  

 Departmental policy limits students to one major within the Department of 
Chemistry.  
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry—75 hours 
 Chemistry Core (42 hours): 

Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 245, 345, 346, 406, 422, 431, 
and 488. 

Chemistry Concentration (10 hours): 
Choose one of the following six options: 
• No concentration: choose any 10 hours of Chemistry electives from the choices 

below. 
• ACS Certified: Chemistry 351, 463; and four hours of Chemistry electives from 

the choices below. 
• Biochemistry: Chemistry 351, 352 and two hours of Chemistry electives from the 

choices below. 
• Computational Modeling: Computer Science 220, 222; Chemistry 445, 471 and 

eight hours of Chemistry electives from the choices below. Note: This 
concentration requires 18 hours of study. 

• Forensic Chemistry (18 hours): Math 201 or Psychology 201; Chemistry 151, 
408; Chemistry 351 or 4 hours of Chemistry electives from the choices below; and 
two courses from Psychology 315, Sociology 233, or Sociology 314. 

• Physical Chemistry: Chemistry 441, 445 and six hours of Chemistry electives 
from the choices below. 

• Synthetic Chemistry: Chemistry 453, 458 and six hours of Chemistry electives 
from the choices below. 

Chemistry Electives: Chemistry 351, 352, 441, 445, 453, 458, 463, and 466. 
 
Major-Related requirements (23 hours): 

Computer Science 141 or 155; Mathematics 161, 162, and 261; and Physics 101-102 
or 121-122. 



134 / Grove City College 

 
Courses that count in the Chemistry major quality point average (MQPA):  
 All courses with “CHEM” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry Secondary 
Education Certification—102 hours 
 Chemistry Core (38 hours): 

Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 345, 346, 351, 402, and 488. 
Major-Related requirements (24 hours): 

Mathematics 161, 162, and 261; Physics 101-102 or 121-122; and Science 202. 
 Education requirements (40 hours): 

Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Chemistry Secondary Education Certification major quality 
point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “CHEM” and “EDUC” prefixes, PSYC 102, and SEDU 101. A 
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. Students should see the Department of 
Education’s section of the Bulletin for more details on teacher certification requirements. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry and General 
Science Secondary Education Certification—108-109 hours 
 Chemistry Core (38 hours): 

Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 345, 346, 351, 402, and 488. 
 Major-Related requirements (30-31 hours): 

Astronomy 206 or 207; Geology 201 or Science 204; Mathematics 161, 162, and 
261; Physics 101-102 or 121-122; and Science 202. 

 Education requirements (40 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Chemistry and General Science Secondary Education 
Certification major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “CHEM” and “EDUC” prefixes; ASTR 206 and 207; GEOL 201; 
SCIC 202, 204; PSYC 102; and SEDU 102 and 103. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required 
to graduate. Students should see the Department of Education’s section of the Bulletin for 
more details on teacher certification requirements. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biochemistry—74 hours 
 Biochemistry Core (55 hours): 

Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 342, 351, 352, 451, 487; 
Biology 101, 102, 233, and 234. 

 Major-Related requirements (19 hours): 
Mathematics 161, 162; Physics 121-122 or 101-102; and Psychology 201. 
 

 
 



Chemistry / 135 
 

Courses that count in the Biochemistry major quality point average (MQPA): 
All courses with “CHEM” and “BIOL” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 

required to graduate. 
 

Course Requirements for a concentration in Chemical Synthesis (8 hours) 
 Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Chemical Synthesis by 
completing Chemistry 422, 431, 453, and 458. 
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Forensic Chemistry (11 hours) 
 Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Forensic Chemistry by 
completing Chemistry 151, 408, and two courses from Psychology 315, Sociology 233, or 
Sociology 314. 
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Health (11-12 hours) 
 Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Health by completing 
Biology 341 or 346; Biology 407; and one of Biology 313, 314, 325, 341, or 346. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Chemistry (24 hours) 
 A minor in Chemistry will consist of Chemistry 111 and 113, or 105; Chemistry 112 
and 114; Chemistry 227 and 241; and eight hours from Chemistry 231, 242, 245, 342, 345, 
346, 406, or 431. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

CHEMISTRY (CHEM) 
CHEM 105. CHEMISTRY FOR ENGINEERS. An introductory survey in the fundamental 
principles of chemistry, including chemical reactions and equations; behavior of gases; chemical 
thermodynamics; basics of electrochemistry; crystal structure; and nuclear, organic, and environmental 
chemical fundamentals. Students who have earned credit for Chemistry 105 may not subsequently 
receive credit for Chemistry 111 or 113.  Three lectures and one lab per week.Fall semester only, four 
hours. 
 
CHEM 111. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I. The first semester of a year-long introduction to the 
fundamental principles of chemistry, including stoichiometry, nomenclature, basic reactions 
(solubility, acid-base and oxidation reduction), gas laws, Laws of Thermodynamics (enthalpy, entropy, 
Gibb’s free energy and equilibrium constant), electronic structure, bonding, molecular structure, 
properties of pure liquids and solids, and solutions. Three lectures per week. No credit will be given to 
students who have already received credit for Chemistry 105.     Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CHEM 112. GENERAL CHEMISTRY II. The completion of the introductory survey of the 
fundamental principles of chemistry which begins in Chemistry 111. Topics covered include concepts 
and theories of rates of reaction, chemical equilibrium, aqueous equilibria, electrochemistry, 
coordination chemistry, nuclear chemistry, descriptive main group chemistry, and an introduction to 
organic chemistry. Three lectures per week.    Prerequisite: Chemistry 111 or 105.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
CHEM 113. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LAB I. This course will develop laboratory skills in 
measurement, use of volumetric glassware and titration. Students will learn to use visible 
spectrometers, calorimeters, and data probes to record results on their computers. They will be exposed 
first-hand to concepts in CHEM 111 like solubility, acid-base neutralization, gas laws and colligative 
properties. Pre- or Co-requisite: Chemistry 111.  Fall semester only, one hour 
 



136 / Grove City College 

 
 
CHEM 114. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LAB II. Students will continue to refine lab skills begun to 
develop in Chemistry 113. They will be exposed first-hand to concepts from Chemistry 112 including 
kinetics, acid-base behavior, electrochemistry and enthalpy of reaction. A working knowledge of the 
following instruments will also be expected by the end of the semester: bench top GC, pH data probes, 
digital multimeter and Spectronic 20.  Prerequisite: Chemistry 113. Pre- or Co-requisite: Chemistry 
112. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
CHEM 151. INTRODUCTION TO FORENSIC SCIENCE. This course provides an overview of 
the field of forensic science and will cover scientific principles and their application in the analysis of 
crime scene evidence. Topics covered will include glass and soil, microscopy, bloodstains, hair, fibers 
fingerprinting and firearms. Three lectures per week. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
CHEM 190. STUDIES IN CHEMISTRY. This course is used to present various introductory topics 
in chemistry. Semester course, one to three hours. 
 
CHEM 227. ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY. A study of the theoretical basis and laboratory 
techniques necessary for the solution of problems in quantitative chemical analysis. Three lectures and 
one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 231. DESCRIPTIVE INORGANIC/BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRY. A survey of 
descriptive inorganic and bioinorganic chemistry. The course is designed to give students an 
introduction to main group inorganic chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, and molecular 
symmetry/group theory. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114, or 105. 
 Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 235. CHEMISTRY IN CONTEXT. Building on the foundation of General Chemistry, topics 
include current issues in chemistry, research and career opportunities, ethics and the integration of the 
Christian faith, researching the chemical literature and an introduction to modern instrumentation. This 
course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for majors in the Department of Chemistry. 
Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114. Fall semester only, one hour.  
 
CHEM 241. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I. An introduction to the structure and chemistry of carbon 
compounds including alkanes, stereochemistry, haloalkanes, alcohols, ethers and alkenes. Structure 
determination by spectroscopic methods is introduced. Three lectures and one lab per week. 
Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 242. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II. A continued study in the chemistry of organic compounds 
including alkynes, conjugated systems, aromatic compounds, aldehydes and ketones, carboxylic acids 
and their derivatives, amines and biological molecules. Structure determination by spectroscopic 
methods is emphasized. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 241.  
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 245. INTRODUCTION TO MOLECULAR MODELING. An introduction to the 
application of molecular modeling to the structure, reactivity and spectra of molecules. The focus will 
be on what can be accomplished using presently available computational chemistry programs and how 
to use the programs to accomplish these tasks. The theoretical background of the techniques and 
algorithms is treated from a user’s perspective, emphasizing practical impacts of various choices the 
user can make in choosing methodology. Students apply the techniques covered in class to small 
chemical systems and compare results of various approximations. Two lectures per week. 
Prerequisites: Chemistry 241 and Mathematics 161. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in chemistry. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



Chemistry / 137 
 

CHEM 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
chemistry. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
CHEM 330. INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL MEDICNE. This course introduces the practice of 
clinical medicine by practicing physicians, integrating studies in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and 
physics in application to a future health career. Students will learn how to take basic medical histories, 
perform a general physical examination, and begin to develop differential diagnoses for various disease 
processes. The course will examine clinical medicine through a detailed examination of the body’s 
major systems including the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, nervous, 
and hematological systems. Prerequisites: Chemistry, Biology or Exercise Science majors with junior 
or senior standing or by permission of instructor. One evening per week.  
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
CHEM 342. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS. An overview of physical 
chemistry with particular application to life sciences. Topics include thermodynamics, equilibrium, 
kinetics, molecular motion, molecular spectroscopy, molecular structure and modeling. Three lectures 
and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 241 and Mathematics 162.  
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 345. MICROSCOPIC PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY: QUANTUM MECHANICS AND 
SPECTROSCOPY. An introduction to the principles of quantum mechanics and their application in 
describing molecular properties. An emphasis is placed on developing a solid understanding of the 
principles of spectroscopy and electronic structure. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: 
Chemistry 231 and Mathematics 261. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 346. MACROSCOPIC PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY: STATISTICAL MECHANICS, 
THERMODYNAMICS, AND KINETICS. The relationships between the properties of macroscopic 
systems are developed to gain an understanding of chemical equilibrium. The principles of statistical 
mechanics are introduced to show how thermodynamic properties can be predicted from molecular 
properties described by quantum mechanics. Connections are developed between chemical kinetics 
and reaction mechanisms. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 112 and 114, 
or 105; and Mathematics 261. Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 351. BIOCHEMISTRY I. An introduction to the molecular forces, equilibria and 
macromolecules that comprise living organisms. Emphasis is placed on proteins as the enzymatic 
catalysts of metabolism and the central role of carbohydrates in intermediary metabolism. Three 
lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 352. BIOCHEMISTRY II. A continued study of the molecular forces, equilibria and 
macromolecules that comprise living organisms. Emphasis is on the structures and biological roles of 
lipids, proteins and nucleic acids. There is also a focus on experimental methods and related molecular 
technologies. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 351.  
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in chemistry. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
CHEM 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Juniors who have displayed aptitude in chemistry 
perform assigned research problems. This course may not be taken concurrently with Chemistry 499. 
Three hours of laboratory work per week per credit hour. Junior standing, permission of the department 
chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
CHEM 390. STUDIES IN CHEMISTRY. This course is used to present various advanced topics in 
chemistry. Semester course, one to three hours. 
 



138 / Grove City College 

CHEM 402. TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY CLASSROOM AND LABORATORY 
INSTRUCTION. A course limited to Chemistry Secondary Education (CSED) and General Science 
Secondary Education (CGSE) majors involving instruction and experience in setting up and 
conducting effective educational chemistry demonstrations and laboratories. Students will also gain 
experience in scientific lecture preparation, including multiple lecture opportunities both in the 
classroom and laboratory settings. Prerequisites: Chemistry 227 and 241.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 406. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS. A course focused on instrumental theory, methods and 
design, and the application of modern instrumentation in chemical analysis. Two lectures and two labs 
per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 227; Recommended: Chemistry 346.  
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
CHEM 408. FORENSIC CHEMISTRY. This course will provide students exposure to the 
processing and analysis of forensic samples. Students will learn how to quantitatively analyze sample 
collections used as evidence in the crime lab, structure and organize lab reports and interpret data to 
be used for evidence. In addition, analytical methods including chromatography, mass spectroscopy, 
absorbance spectroscopy, fingerprint identification and microscopy used in forensic applications will 
be covered.  One lecture and 4-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 227. Corequisite Chemistry 
406.  Alternate years, spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 422 INORGANIC SYNTHESIS LABORATORY.  This course involves the synthesis and 
physical characterization of inorganic and organometallic compounds of main group and transition 
metal compounds.  Two labs per week.  Prerequisites: Chemistry 231 and 242; Corequisite: Chemistry 
431. Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 428. ORGANOMETALLIC CHEMISTRY. A study of the synthesis and properties of 
organometallic compounds and their role in modern catalytic processes. The rapidly growing areas of 
bioinorganic and bioorganometallic chemistry is discussed. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: 
Chemistry 421. Offered infrequently, three hours. 
 
CHEM 431. ADVANCED INORGANIC/ORGANOMETALLIC CHEMISTRY. An in-depth 
study of transition metal chemistry. The relationships between the symmetry of molecules and their 
physical and chemical properties will be explored, as well as the role that organometallic compounds 
play in modern catalytic processes. Two lectures per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 231; and 
Chemistry 342 or 345. Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 441. CRYSTAL STRUCTURE ANALYSIS. An introduction to the principles of x-ray 
crystallography. Theory of x-ray diffraction will be covered in addition to instruction on selecting, 
mounting, analyzing, refining and determining structures of various crystals. Students will learn to 
operate a bench-top x-ray instrument and become proficient with the operational and analysis software. 
Prerequisite: Chemistry 231. Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 445. ADVANCED COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY. Computational chemistry 
methods are used today in such diverse fields as neuroscience, pharmaceuticals, interstellar chemistry, 
and catalysis. This course will build upon the introduction to molecular modeling presented in 
Chemistry 245 and focus on ab initio methods of calculating properties and interactions of small 
molecules to solve chemical problems. Practical use of commercial software will constitute a major 
component of the students’ assessment. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 245 and 
Corequisite: Chemistry 345; or Prerequisite: Chemistry 245, 342, and Mathematics 162. 
 Alternate year, Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 451. BIOCHEMISTRY: DATA AND ANALYSIS. A continued study of the 
macromolecules of living systems, their structures and the methods used to elucidate those structures. 
Emphasis is placed on the generation, analysis and presentation of data from a variety of experimental 
approaches with special consideration given to the unifying theme of computer aided data analysis. 
Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 352. Fall semester only, three hours. 



Chemistry / 139 
 

CHEM 453. ADVANCED MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY. A study in modern spectral analysis 
for the determination of molecular structure, including advanced topics involving mass spectrometry, 
infrared spectrometry, and multiple pulse NMR techniques such as 2-dimensional NMR. Two lectures 
per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 458. ADVANCED SYNTHESIS LABORATORY. This course is designed to give the 
student a broad range of advanced synthetic laboratory experiences. The course covers the synthesis 
of a wide range of organic, inorganic, and organometallic compounds involving specialized techniques 
typical of a research environment. Two labs per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242. 
 Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in chemistry. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
CHEM 463. POLYMER CHEMISTRY. An introduction to the structure, synthesis, and physical 
properties of the major organic polymers. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.   
 Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
CHEM 466. ADVANCED ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. A detailed study of organic reactive 
intermediates and organic reaction mechanisms. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.   

Alternate spring semesters, two hours. 
 
CHEM 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Seniors who have displayed aptitude in chemistry 
perform assigned research problems. This course may not be taken concurrently with Chemistry 499. 
Three hours of laboratory work per week per credit hour. Prerequisite: Chemistry 370, permission of 
the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
CHEM 471. COMPUTATONAL CHEMISTRY PROJECT. This course serves as the capstone to 
the computational modeling concentration in the chemistry major. A student will design and complete 
a computational chemistry project under the supervision of a faculty member. Prerequisites: Chemistry 
245, 345, and Computer Science 141. Offered periodically as needed, one or two hours. 
 
CHEM 480. INTERNSHIP IN CHEMISTRY. Selected students participate in an individual field 
experiences in a research laboratory under the supervision of professional staff. Minimum two weeks 
work required per intern credit hour. The grade is determined on the basis of a written evaluation by 
the cooperating institution mentor and a written report by the student submitted to the Chemistry 
Department. Prerequisites: Minimum 24 hours in chemistry and permission of the department.  
 Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
CHEM 487. BIOCHEMISTRY SEMINAR. This course includes faculty directed reading, analysis, 
and discussion of the biochemical literature. The course also involves in-depth research, written paper, 
and oral presentation of an approved topic selected by the student. Senior status in the department 
required for enrollment. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) 
requirements for the Biochemistry major. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
CHEM 488. CHEMISTRY SEMINAR. This course includes faculty directed reading, analysis, and 
discussion of the chemical literature. The course also involves in-depth research, written paper, and 
oral presentation of an approved topic selected by the student. Senior status in the department required 
for enrollment. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) 
requirements for majors in the Department of Chemistry. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
CHEM 499. HONORS IN CHEMICAL RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in 
chemistry may, with consent of the Department of Chemistry, undertake supervised chemistry 
research. Not to exceed two hours each semester. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 



140 / Grove City College 

DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION AND VISUAL ARTS 
Dr. Miller, Chair; Mr. Mucha, Director of Design and Visual Arts; Mr. Bandy, Ms. Barrios. 
Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Catanese, Mr. Hammond, Mrs. Pritchard, Mr. 
Sanders. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Communication Arts—36 hours  
 Communication Arts Core (15 hours): 

Communication Arts 104 or 109 (total of three hours), 135, 212, 215, and 225. 
 Communication Arts Electives (21 hours): 

Media & Design (6 hours): 
Two courses from Communication Arts 245, 277, 359, 378, 388, Design 101, 102, 
201, or 210. 

Culture & Theory (6 hours): 
Two courses from Communication Arts 222, 240, 250, 304, 352, 362, 444, 427. 

Professional & Technical (6 hours): 
Two courses from Communication Arts 235, 300, 303, 305, 405, 406, 459, or Art 
320. 

Capstone Elective (3 hours): 
Choose three hours from Communication Arts 470, 480, 488, or 499. 

 
Courses that count in the Communication Arts major quality point average (MQPA): 

All courses with “COMM” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Recommended Electives: 
 The required courses and electives provide the graduating student a strong foundation 
for a career in professional communication, graduate study in communication, or more 
effective performance in the career of his/her choice. Additional recommendations include 
two-years of language study at the college level and a minor in an area of interest including 
Design, English, Entrepreneurship, International Business, International Studies, 
Management, Marketing, Psychology, Sociology, or Theatre. Students are encouraged to 
discuss their vocational interests with their advisors so they can design a tailored plan for 
their program of study. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Design and Innovation—63 
hours 
 Design and Innovation Core (36 hours): 

Design 101, 102, 201, 202, 207, 210, 301; Communication Arts 135; 
Entrepreneurship 101, 104, 201; and Marketing 104. 

 Design and Innovation Major Electives (27 hours): 
Communication Arts Electives (9 hours): 

Choose three courses from Communication Arts 104, 303, 406, 470, 480, or any 
300- or 400-level Communication Arts courses. 

Entrepreneurship Electives (9 hours): 
Choose three courses from Entrepreneurship 309, 328, 330, 409, 470, 480, or any 
300- or 400-level Entrepreneurship courses. 

Marketing Electives (6 hours): 
Choose two courses from Marketing 415, 417, 419, or 420. 

Capstone Elective (3 hours): 
Choose one course from Design 401 or 480. 

 
 



Communication and Visual Arts / 141 
 

Courses that count in the Design and Innovation major quality point average (MQPA): 
All courses with “DESI”, “COMM”, “ENTR”, and “MARK” prefix. A minimum 

MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 The faculty in the Department of Communication and Visual Arts is committed to 
providing the opportunities Communication Arts majors and other students need to excel in 
oral, written, and visual communication. For success in today’s society, information literacy 
is also a critical skill. To these ends, Communication Arts 104 is designated as a Speaking 
Intensive (SI) course; Communication Arts 212 and Communication Arts 427 are designed 
as Writing Intensive (WI) courses; and Communication Arts 212 address the key issues 
involved with Information Literary (IL) and are designated as such. These courses include 
learning experiences that are designed to prepare Communication Arts majors to be 
effective and ethical producers and consumers of knowledge. 

 
SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES 

 The Department of Communication and Visual Arts offers students significant co-
curricular activities, including: 

• The Speech and Debate Team, which participates in both individual events and group 
debate. 

• American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA) student group. 
• Involvement with The Collegian (campus newspaper), WSAJ (radio station), The 

Echo (literary magazine), The Quad (quarterly magazine), The Bridge (yearbook), 
or the College’s Office of Marketing and Communications. 

• Internships, whereby students earn academic credit for work done in conjunction 
with a professional organization related to communication (e.g., local newspaper, 
radio, or television station). See the course description for Communication Arts 480. 

 
Course Requirements for a minor in Communication Arts (18 hours) 
 A minor in Communication Arts will consist of Communication Arts 104 or 109 (total 
of 3 hours); one theory course from Communication Arts 215, 222, 304, or 305; and 12 
additional hours from any courses with COMM prefix. The one credit course, Theatre 259, 
may be repeated, and a maximum of three hours may count toward the minor. A 
Communication Internship (Communication Arts 480) may not count as an elective course 
toward the minor. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Design (21 hours) 
 A minor in Design will consist of Design 101, 102, 201, 202; Design 220 or Art 202; 
and two courses from Art 101, 105, 121, Design 110, 207, 210, 301, 390, 401, 
Communication Arts 212, 245, 277, or 378. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Studio Art (21 hours) 
 A minor in Studio Art will consist of one 2D Art course from Art 101, 105 or 121; one 
3D Art course from Art 103, 104 or 111; one Art History course from Art 201 or 202; and 
12 additional hours from Art 101, 103, 104, 105, 111, 121, 201, 202, 207, 208, 290, 320, 
390, Design 101, 102, or 210. 

 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

 



142 / Grove City College 

COMMUNICATION ARTS (COMM) 
COMM 104. PUBLIC SPEAKING AND RHETORIC. Introduces students to the preparation and 
presentation of material for a variety of public speaking situations. This performance-oriented class 
offers instruction in the theory of rhetoric, material development, and delivery techniques. Students 
will review the historical importance of oral communication and the role it plays in society. This course 
fulfills the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for Communication Arts majors.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 109. FORENSICS. A skills-based course designed to improve students’ ability to analyze 
ideas, advocate ideas in individual debate, and to prepare and deliver oral communications. Students 
will develop and refine their ability to research, organize, and present orally ideas in the form of 
informative, critical, and persuasive speeches, Lincoln-Douglas style debates, or individual 
performances of literature in the form of oral interpretation of literature. May be taken up to three 
times. Semester course, one hour. 
 
COMM 135. WRITING FOR THE MEDIA. Provides an introduction to the substance, structure, 
and style of multiple forms of non-narrative mass media including print, broadcast, film, and the 
Internet.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 212. RESEARCH METHODS IN COMMUNICATION. Examines the fundamentals of 
research approaches and methods in communication studies, both qualitative and quantitative. The 
course also examines a variety of actual communication research studies across the breadth of the field 
from interpersonal to mass communication. Students will learn questionnaire design and interviewing 
techniques. This course, along with Communication 427, fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) 
requirement, fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for Communication Arts majors. 
Prerequisite: Communication Arts 215. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 215. PRINCIPLES OF MEDIA. This course offers an introduction of the historical and 
conceptual foundations of media, including oral, print, photographic, broadcast, cinematic, and digital 
cultural forms and practices. Drawing upon a comparative approach, students will examine the nature 
of mediated communication, the functions of media, and the history of transformations in media and 
the institutions that help define media’s place in society. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 222. FILM HISTORY AND THEORY. Encompasses the history of the motion picture from 
its invention in 1895 to the present day, focusing on American film. Introduction to film theories and 
criticism including principles of aesthetics and the art of how a film is created, from concept to 
completion. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 224. MEDIA, RELIGION AND DEMOCRACY. Explores a variety of questions and 
problems related to the mass media in a democracy. Questions related to media control, government 
regulation of media, political economy, journalistic “objectivity”, and the advertising-editorial 
dichotomy are included. Christian reactions and religious activism related to the media are discussed. 
Chomsky, Herman, McChesney, Postman and other critical theorists are studied. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 225. INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION. Provides an overview of the study of 
communication and culture. Course content focuses primarily on the theory and practice of 
communication in intercultural contexts. Students will examine cross-cultural communication 
(communication across cultures) and intercultural communication (communication between members 
of different cultures). This course is especially suited to students whose future careers may involve 
travel overseas or business with non-native Americans. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 235. JOURNALISM. Reviews a variety of print and broadcast media, exploring editorial 
style and slant. Fundamental newsgathering and news writing skills will be studied and practiced. 
Students will gather information from campus, community, and research sources in order to develop 



Communication and Visual Arts / 143 
 

hard news, feature, and in-depth stories. Ethical and legal issues will be explored as well as the role of 
print media in shaping current events. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 240. MEDIA CRITICISM. An introduction to theoretical approaches and practices used to 
analyze the content, structure, and context of media in society. Primary attention will be paid to how 
the fundamental elements of media combine to create meaning and tell stories, the forms media texts 
make, and the way these structures influence viewers/listeners/users. The course will also explore what 
media is and why various media forms have developed in certain ways through history and across 
nations. Students will understand, analyze, and apply a working knowledge of terms and concepts 
underlying contemporary media studies, the economic, social, and political impact of the media 
industries, and the aesthetic and ethical implications of the media. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 245. DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY. This course will cover foundational photography 
principles in the context of how the art and techniques of photography now come together through the 
tools of the camera, the computer and industry-standard software. Students will work and be guided 
through assigned projects with digital cameras and systems to learn how to leverage emerging 
technologies of imagery.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 250. DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP. To be a digital citizen in today’s global village one must 
know how to navigate the various online venues and be tuned into the ethical behavior governing their 
use. This course will use hands-on learning, discussion and reading to explore this digital world. 
Students will create blogs, wikis, avatars, podcasts, upload photos to Flickr and learn about tagging in 
sites like De.li.cious. Students will ponder the sociological impact of this Internet world and explore 
their own reactions to it by being actively involved in it. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 110.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in communication 
studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMM 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
communication studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty 
sponsor are required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMM 272. DEVELOPING CHARACTERS. A creative writing course that will allow students to 
develop character backstory and explore the impact of character psychology on action and in dialogue. 
Concepts will enhance character development for film scripts, short stories, novels, and more. Students 
may only receive credit for one of Communication Arts 272 or Writing 272. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 277. AUDIO PRODUCTION. Reviews the basics of audio production for recording. A 
particular emphasis is placed on the medium of radio including web casting. Consideration will be 
given to the history of radio broadcasting; properties of sound; microphone types; recording and 
control room techniques; and computerized editing of audio materials. Students will undertake a 
variety of practical projects in public affairs, news, sports, remote, music, and drama programming 
with opportunity for airing quality work on the College radio station. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 290. STUDIES IN COMMUNICATION. Intensive examination of an area of 
communication not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each 
semester. Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



144 / Grove City College 

COMM 300. PUBLIC RELATIONS. Focuses on public relations theory, strategy, and techniques. 
The course emphasizes writing and developing public relations campaigns; theories of public 
persuasion; legal and ethical considerations; and crisis management and related issues. Students will 
develop a portfolio for a campus or community organization which will include: an overall campaign 
plan, news releases, a brochure, a speech, a print advertisement, a radio advertisement, and a final 
campaign presentation. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 135 or 235 recommended.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 303. PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Focuses on speaking and writing tools most 
often used by business professionals. Presentational speaking, personal communicative development, 
professional communication, and interviewing will be emphasized. Issues that relate to professional 
success will be explored. Must have junior or senior standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 304. INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION. This course examines the fundamental 
principles of effective interpersonal communication. Students are given the opportunity to work in 
experiential learning groups and to reflect on effective and ineffective interpersonal communication 
processes. Effective interpersonal communication is a critical component of competent and ethical 
decision-making. Emphasizing a relational view of communication – one that explores how 
relationships are created, negotiated, maintained, and in some cases terminated – this course is 
designed with a dual approach consisting of both theory and application that allows for the opportunity 
to critically analyze and evaluate the intricacies of interpersonal relationships in various contexts. 
Prerequisites: Communication Arts 207 or permission of instructor. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 305. PERSUASION THEORY. Explores a variety of media to ascertain the persuasive 
messages inherent in each genre. The course will familiarize the students with the processes of 
persuasion, methods of studying persuasion, the theories of persuasion, and ethical concerns about 
persuasion. The perspectives and tools developed should enable the student to develop effective 
message strategies in both professional and personal life. An excellent course for pre-professional 
majors and students involved in speech and debate. This course, along with Communication 104, 207, 
212, and 427, fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for Communication Arts majors. 
Prerequisite: Communication Arts 207 or permission of instructor. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 352. CHRISTIAN FAITH AND CINEMA. A survey of films, both the decidedly Christian 
and decidedly secular. The student will consider the importance of a film’s theme in deciding its worth, 
criteria by which they can choose valuable films to watch, and will evaluate secular films through a 
Christian perspective. The student will also learn what it means to possess a Biblical worldview and 
how “other” worldviews permeate popular cinema.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 359. SCREENWRITING. This course is an introductory course for screenwriters. Topics of 
study will include character development, plot structure, storytelling techniques in film, as well as the 
narrative structure. Students will study films and screenplays as they learn to recognize various 
elements mentioned previously in feature films. Additionally, students will learn to craft their own 
stories for the screen. Students may only receive credit for one of Communication Arts 359 or Writing 
359. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunities for students with extensive background in 
communication studies to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Sophomore 
or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMM 362. MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS. Reviews relevant communication and media law and 
addresses a variety of communication-related ethical issues such as: libel, privacy, copyright, 
newsgathering rights, etc. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
communication studies. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 



Communication and Visual Arts / 145 
 

COMM 378. VIDEO PRODUCTION. An introduction to broadcasting history, media aesthetics, 
and the technology and practice of multimedia production. Lectures, tutorials, and hands-on experience 
with cameras, microphones, lighting, and computer-based video editing will provide the basis for 
further study and internships in this influential medium of mass communication. 
  Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 388. DOCUMENTARY FILM. Encompasses the history and theory of the documentary 
film genre in motion pictures and television, from the earliest cinematic experiments to the present. 
The course examines various roles the documentary plays, such as explorer, reporter, painter, advocate, 
poet, catalyst, and guerrilla. Students will learn basics of visual literacy and will storyboard and shoot 
their own documentary using computerized video editing systems. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 
378. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 390. STUDIES IN COMMUNICATION. Intensive examination of areas of communication 
not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.   

Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 

COMM 405. SPECIAL EVENTS AND PROMOTIONS. This course offers an introduction to the 
principles and practices relevant to successful event planning. The course content will explore a variety 
of topic areas such as social and cultural phenomenon of special events, site selection, program 
planning, budgeting and sponsorships, vendor and volunteer staff management, and publicity. Through 
the process of researching, planning, coordinating, and evaluating events, students will learn how to 
design and execute events, meetings, conferences, and conventions for a variety of organizations 
including trade and professional associations, non-profit organizations, and corporations. Students may 
(under the direction of the instructor) opt to take this course a second time ONLY IF they actively 
participate as a leader in a new/ different role than in previous semester. Prerequisites: Junior or senior 
standing, or permission of instructor.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 406. SOCIAL MEDIA WRITING. This course will explore a variety of social media writing 
experiences. Solid writing practices will be defined (grammar, structure, research), followed by 
practical experiential learning where students will write for a variety of online platforms. Students will 
complete the course with a solid foundation on which to build careers in numerous areas- marketing, 
writing, and production, among others. While specific platforms will be explored, it is a distinct aim 
of the course to give students the tools they need to write for existing social media as well as new and 
emerging media. Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing, or permission of instructor.   
 Online only, three hours. 
 
COMM 427. RHETORICAL CRITICISM. This course is required for Communication Arts majors. 
Students study a variety of rhetorical-critical methodologies including metaphoric, pentadic, cluster, 
narrative, fantasy theme, and ideological approaches. Students engage in rhetorical criticism 
throughout the term. The final project is an original rhetorical critique of a significant text for 
submission to a professional conference or publication. This course, along with Communication 212, 
fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) requirement, for Communication Arts majors. Prerequisites: 
Communication Arts 207 and 212; and senior status or permission of instructor.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 444. ADVANCED FILM THEORY. A deeper look at the medium of motion pictures from 
the point of view of film theorists including semiotics; realism; expressionism; auteur theory; cinema 
as art; montage; film as narrative; literature and adaptations to the screen; documentary and propaganda 
approaches; genre conventions; psychology; sociology; mythology; and ideology. 
  Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 459. ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION. Provides a critical exploration of 
organizational communication theory, research, and application. This course examines the factors 
involved in the functioning and analysis of complex organizations, particularly the direct and indirect 
ways in which communication processes and social dynamics affect organizations and employee 
interaction.  Semester course, three hours. 



146 / Grove City College 

COMM 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunities for students with extensive background in 
communication studies to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Sophomore 
or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMM 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
communication studies. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMM 480. INTERNSHIP IN COMMUNICATION. Students may, with consent of the 
department, earn academic credit for work done in a communication-related organization (e.g., 
newspaper; radio or television station; public relations office; business; etc.). Students must arrange 
for a faculty advisor, contact the organization where work will be done, keep a daily log of activities, 
and write a final paper summarizing the internship. Students must work 60 contact hours for each 
academic credit earned. Sophomore or higher standing and permission of the department internship 
coordinator are required. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
COMM 488. SEMINAR. An advanced course for junior and senior Communication Arts majors to 
concentrate on specific subject matter to be determined by the instructor. Individual research and 
extensive oral and written reports are required. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMM 499. HONORS IN COMMUNICATION. The student who chooses to pursue work beyond 
the basic requirements may do extensive reading in one of the following areas: media studies; 
organizational communication; public relations; audio and video production; filmmaking; oral 
interpretation; public address; group communication; and rhetorical or communication theory. 
Extensive research paper and independent reading required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, permission 
of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

DESIGN (DESI) 
DESI 101. INTRO TO VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN. This course is an in-depth 
analysis of design principles and formal concepts that builds fundamental knowledge of design as a 
visual language and communication tool. Students will learn through practical application using 
industry-standard software.           Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 102. DESIGN THINKING. Students will investigate essential processes that form the basis for 
all types of design disciplines including the ability to think divergently, problem solve, and empathize.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 110. DESIGN SOFTWARE FOR BEGINNERS. Adobe Creative Suite is the industry-
standard tool set for virtually every design practitioner. In this class, students learn about Adobe 
Creative Cloud and how to use Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign while integrating them in a logical 
workflow. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 190. STUDIES IN DESIGN. Intensive examination of areas of design not fully covered by 
regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.   

Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
DESI 201. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN I. In this course, students are challenged with 
complex design problems for both print and digital environments with a particular emphasis on 
typography and layout. Prerequisite: Design 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 202. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN II. This course continues to cultivate skill in 
applying design principles and tools as students manipulate form and image to create conceptually 
strong designs and visual systems. Prerequisite: Design 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 



Communication and Visual Arts / 147 
 

DESI 207. WEBSITE DEVELOPMENT FOR DESIGNERS. This is a foundational course in the 
essential tools and technologies upon which websites are built. It is a course designed for students 
approaching website development from a design and communication perspective and assumes no prior 
experience with programming or web development technologies. In this course, students will learn 
HTML and CSS, and will be able to demonstrate how to structure, style, and publish websites. 
Prerequisite: Design 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 210. INTERACTIVE DESIGN. This course introduces students to strategy-based process for 
planning and designing digital user experiences as well as the essentials of web design using industry-
standard software. Prerequisite: Design 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 220. DESIGN HISTORY. In this course, students will explore the origins of visual 
communication and its evolution into the professional discipline commonly referred to as “Design”. 
This is an introductory course that provides students with cultural and contextual understanding of 
various professional design disciplines. Students will spend time studying art and design movements, 
trends, and key individuals associated with each. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 301. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN III. In this course, students investigate the 
design of logos, marks, and brands in a variety of scenarios. Students will craft strategies, work with 
realistic constraints, and consider how a brand communicates across a variety of channels as a system. 
Prerequisite: Design 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 390. STUDIES IN DESIGN. Intensive examination of areas of design not fully covered by 
regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.   

Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 

DESI 401. DESIGN IN PRACTICE. This course introduces students to professional aspects of 
design such as portfolio preparation and presentation, formulating and pitching design concepts, 
understanding client needs, and creating professional design documents such as proposals, statements 
of work, and invoices. Students will also learn about pricing, formatting for project delivery, and how 
to collaborate with clients. Prerequisite: Design 101 and junior or senior standing. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
DESI 480. INTERNSHIP IN DESIGN. Students may, with consent of the department, earn academic 
credit for work done in a design-related organization. Students must arrange for a faculty advisor, 
contact the organization where work will be done, keep a daily log of activities, and write a final paper 
summarizing the internship. Students must work 60 contact hours for each academic credit earned. 
Sophomore or higher standing and permission of the department internship coordinator are required.
 Semester course, one to six hours. 

VISUAL ARTS (ART) 
ART 101. ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF DRAWING. This course introduces students to 
essential 2D art concepts and techniques using a variety of drawing tools to produce black and white 
renderings on paper. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 103. CERAMICS I HANDBUILDING. This is an introductory studio class designed to expose 
students to a variety of ceramic processes used to produce sculpture and vessel. The goal is to broaden 
students’ understanding of clay as a viable medium for personal visual expression. An additional fee 
is charged for this course. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 104. CERAMICS I WHEEL. This is an introductory studio class designed to expose students 
to the potter’s wheel and throwing techniques used to produce hand-thrown vessels. The goal is to 
broaden students’ understanding of clay as a viable medium for personal visual expression as they 
create unique, finished clay. An additional fee is charged for this course. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 



148 / Grove City College 

ART 105 INTRODUCTION TO COLOR THEORY IN PAINTING. This course is an introduction 
to basic painting techniques and tools including acrylic, oil, and watercolor on a variety of substrates. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 111. INTRODUCTION TO SCULPTURE. This is an introductory studio class designed to 
expose students to a variety of sculptural processes and materials used to produce 3D art. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 121. BEGINNING PRINTMAKING. This course is an introduction to printmaking methods 
typically used by artists and designers. In addition to understanding techniques, students will be 
challenged to think practically as they balance the affordances and constraints of various printmaking 
processes. An additional fee is charged for this course. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 201. HISTORY AND APPRECIATION OF ART I. A survey of the visual arts (including 
painting, architecture, and sculpture) from prehistory through the High Renaissance, studied through 
illustrated lectures, readings, and class discussions. Students may take either Art 201 or 202 or both 
classes, in any order. Prerequisite: Humanities 301. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 202. HISTORY AND APPRECIATION OF ART II. A survey of the visual arts (including 
painting, architecture, and sculpture) from Mannerism through the Twentieth Century, studied through 
illustrated lectures, readings, and class discussions. Students may take either Art 201 or 202 or both 
classes, in any order. Prerequisite: Humanities 301. Semester course, three hours. 
  
ART 207. CERAMICS II. This course is a continuation of the beginning ceramics class where 
students refine their understanding of the medium. Students are challenged to build a body of work 
and develop a personal style. An additional fee is charged for this course. Prerequisite: Art 103 or 104.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 208. PUEBLO POTTERY. The primary focus of this course is to increase understanding and 
appreciation for the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest and their pottery. Students use traditional Pueblo 
techniques to make tools, process clay, and produce artwork. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in art. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in art. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required 
. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 290. STUDIES IN VISUAL ARTS. Typically offered during May Intersession, this travel 
course features the culture, music, and art of selected areas of Western Europe and is given as credit 
for those taking the travel interim who have already received credit for Humanities 301: Civilization 
and the Arts. Course content includes viewing assigned pre-trip documentaries, attending all trip 
lectures and visits, completing assigned readings, and keeping a directed journal. Trip fees apply.  
 Intersession course, three hours. 
 
ART 320. GALLERY STUDIES. This course provides an experience for students who are interested 
in the arts in fields such as a gallery director, an event planner, as well as those who are interested in 
pursuing a career as an artist.  Students in the course will gain valuable working experiences in planning 
and executing successful gallery-related events.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
ART 321. THE USE OF ART IN THE CLASSROOM. A study of materials and methods of 
instruction in art for the elementary and preschool including topics in the theory and practice of 
teaching art. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Semester course, one hour. 
 



Communication and Visual Arts / 149 
 

ART 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Advanced study in an area of art not available through regular 
course offerings. An independent study form is required to register for this class. Sophomore or higher 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in art. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 390. STUDIES IN VISUAL ARTS. A course that covers special topics in the field of arts.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Advanced study in an area of art not available through regular 
course offerings. An independent study form is required to register for this class. Junior or higher 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in art. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ART 488. SEMINAR IN ART. Available only by pre-approved permission of the department chair 
and the instructor involved. An additional fee is charged for this course.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Dr. Wolfe, Chair; Dr. Al Moakar, Dr. M. W. Bright, Dr. Dellinger, Dr. Dickinson, Dr. 
Hutchins, Dr. H. Zhang. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Carlin. 
 
 The Computer Science Department seeks to provide its students with a solid foundation 
in the field of computing in order to prepare them for employment in an exciting industry 
or for advanced studies in top-ranked graduate schools. This foundation is built on 
knowledge of mathematics, programming languages, algorithms and data structures, and 
theory. In addition, students explore advanced topics, research projects, and technology 
projects. 
 The Department believes that it must transmit more than technical expertise to its 
students: whenever possible, the curriculum emphasizes the need for students to understand 
their responsibilities to society and to behave ethically, as well as to strengthen and live their 
Christian faith and witness to the professional community. 
 Students who complete a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science or a Bachelor of 
Arts in Computer Science are prepared to use their computer science skills in a variety of 
jobs or in their graduate education. Students who complete a Bachelor of Science in Data 
Science are equipped with a combination of mathematics, statistics, computer science, and 
data science knowledge, as well as knowledge of a particular domain where they can apply 
data science techniques to solve practical problems. Broadly educated persons with 
computing skills are in great demand. 
 No matter what career is pursued, computing professionals must possess the ability to 
locate, evaluate, and use information. In addition, they must be able to communicate their 
ideas and conclusions clearly and coherently through the written and spoken word. 
Instruction in these core communication skills is provided in Computer Science 205, 350, 
451, and 452, which cover the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) 
requirements and provide partial coverage of the Information Literacy requirement. As a 
related concern, one of the significant problems in the computer field today is the proper 



150 / Grove City College 

application of ethics. For this reason, all computer science majors are required to take 
Computer Science 205 Ethics, Faith, and the Conscious Mind.  
 The Computer Science Department has formulated the following objectives and 
specific outcomes to guide us in directing and evaluating our program. 

 
Program Educational Objectives 

1. Graduates active in the computer science profession will be successful because of 
strong technical skills, including problem-solving and programming. 

2. Graduates active professionally will be successful because of strong 
communication and team skills. 

3. Graduates’ behavior will be guided by professional and ethical principles based 
on Biblical truths and a Christian worldview. 

 
Student Outcomes 

1. Analyze a complex computing problem and apply principles of computing and 
other relevant disciplines to identify solutions 

2. Design, implement, and evaluate a computing-based solution to meet a given set 
of computing requirements in the context of the program’s discipline 

3. Communicate effectively in a variety of professional contexts 
4. Recognize professional responsibilities and make informed judgments in 

computing practice based on legal and ethical principles 
5. Function effectively as a member or leader of a team engaged in activities 

appropriate to the program’s discipline 
6. Apply computer science theory and software development fundamentals to 

produce computing-based solutions (B.S. in Computer Science only) 
 

Computing Facility 
 The Computer Science department is located in the Science, Technology, Engineering, 
and Math (STEM) building. Students have exclusive use of two labs designed specifically 
to help students work collaboratively by utilizing horseshoe-shaped table and display 
configurations called “pods.” Each of the eight pods in a room has a large monitor; students 
can connect their school-issued laptops to the monitor in order to display to their table or, 
with faculty permission, to show their work to the rest of class. Students also use the labs 
outside of class to work on group projects.  
 In addition, the Department has console-game development stations (e.g. Sony PS4), 
Apple MacBook computers, iPads, and Android tablets for mobile application development. 
All of this equipment is available for both class and research use. Microsoft software is 
available for all department majors, and includes many software products (e.g., professional 
versions of Visual Studio and the Office Suite). The Department also has dedicated 
equipment for work in computer security 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Science—89-92 
hours 

Computer Science Core Requirements (27 hours): 
Computer Science 141, 155, 220, 222, 233, 244, 314, 325, and 342. 

Advanced Core Requirements (23 hours): 
Computer Science 205, 340, 350, 422, 443, 448, 451, and 452. 

 
Computer Science Electives (15 hours): 

Choose fifteen hours from Computer Science 390, 401, 402, 435, 441, 442, 445, 446, 
447, 475, Data Science 431, 450, or Robotics 302. 



Computer Science / 151 
 

Math/Science Core Requirements: (24-27 hours): 
Mathematics 161, 162, and 213. 
Mathematics 214; or Mathematics 222 and 331. 
Choose eight credits from Physics 101; PHYS 102; Chemistry 105 or both Chemistry 
111 and 113; Chemistry 112 and 114; Biology 101; or Biology 102. Note: 
Completing both Chemistry 105 and Chemistry 111/113 will not fulfill this this 
requirement. 
 

Courses that count in the Bachelor of Science in Computer Science major quality point 
average (MQPA): All courses with “COMP” prefix, “DSCI” prefix, and MATH 213. A 
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 

B.S. in COMPUTER SCIENCE MAJOR FOUR-YEAR PLAN 
FRESHMAN YEAR   SOPHOMORE YEAR 
 Fall  Spring                            Fall   Spring 
COMP 141 – COMP 220   3   3 COMP 222 – COMP 205   3 3 
COMP 155 – MATH 162   3   4 COMP 244 – COMP 233   3 3 
MATH 161 – Science Elective  4   4 MATH 213 – COMP 342   4 3 
Science Elective – WRIT 101   4   3 HUMA 200 – MATH 214   3 4 
HUMA 102 – PHYE 100   3   1 Found. Soc. Sci. – HUMA 202   3   3 
 17 15 General Electives   1 __     
       17 16 
JUNIOR YEAR   SENIOR YEAR 
COMP 325 – COMP 314   3 3 COMP 448 – COMP 443   3 3 
COMP 422 – COMP 340   3 3 COMP 451 – COMP 452   2 3 
Comp. Sci. Elec. – COMP 350  3 3 Comp. Sci. Electives   3 3 
Comp. Sci. Electives   3 3 HUMA 303 – General Elec.   3 3 
HUMA 301 – General Elec.   3 3 General Electives   3 3 
General Electives   2   1 General Elective   1 __ 
 17      16     15 15 
   
Note: Students must work with their advisor during their sophomore year to create a plan 
for their computer science electives, since some electives are only offered in alternate years 
and require certain prerequisites. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Computer Science—60-62 hours 

Computer Science Core Requirements (35 hours): 
Computer Science 141, 155, 205, 220, 222, 233, 244, 325, 340 or 342, 350, 451, and 
452. 

Computer Science Electives (15 hours): 
Choose fifteen hours from any 300-400 level Computer Science, any 300-400 level 
Data Science courses, and ROBO 302. 

Math Requirements: (10-12 hours): 
Mathematics 118 or 213. 
One of Mathematics 201, 214, 331, Management 201, or Psychology 201. 
Mathematics 141 or 161. 

 
Courses that count in the Bachelor of Arts in Computer Science major quality point 
average (MQPA):  
 All courses with “COMP” prefix, MATH 118, and MATH 213. A minimum MQPA 
of 2.00 is required to graduate. 



152 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Data Science—67-71 hours 
Math and Statistics Requirements (22 hours):   

Mathematics 161, 162, 213, 214, Management 202, and one of Management 201, 
Mathematics 201, or Psychology 201.  Note: Students may substitute Mathematics 
222 and 331 for Mathematics 214. 

Computer Science Requirements (15 hours): 
Computer Science 141, 220, 222, 244, and 435. 

Data Science Requirements (12 hours): 
Data Science 144, 215, 431, and 450. 

Technical Elective (3 hours): 
Choose one course (3 credits) from Computer 233, 445, Management 212, 310, or 
314. 

Domain Concentration (15-19 hours): 
Complete one of the following concentrations: 

Behavioral and Social Sciences (choose focus area from below): 
• Economics: Economics 101, 102, 120, and six hours from any 300-400 

level Economics courses. 
• Exercise Science: Exercise Science 101, six hours from any 300-400 

level Exercise Science courses (excluding EXER 305), and six hours 
from any additional Exercise Science courses. 

• Political Science: Political Science 104, 201, one of Political Science 
204 or 205, and six hours from any 300-400 level Political Science 
courses. 

• Psychology: Psychology 101, six hours from any 300-400 level 
Psychology courses and six hours from any additional Psychology 
courses (excluding Psychology 201). 

• Social Work: Social Work 101, 264, 342, 382, and three hours from any 
300-400 level Social Work courses. 

• Sociology: Sociology 101, 377, 473, and six hours from any 300-400 
level Sociology courses. 

Business (choose focus area from below): 
• Accounting: Accounting 201, 202, 301, 321, and 405. 
• Business: Accounting 201, 202, Finance 301, Management 103, and 

Marketing 104. 
• Entrepreneurship: Accounting 201, Entrepreneurship 101, 102, 201, 

Finance 301, and two hours from any 300-400 level Entrepreneurship 
courses. 

• Finance: Accounting 201, 202, Finance 301, 332, 440, and three hours 
from any 300-400 level Finance courses. 

• Management: Management 103, 457, 475, and six hours from any 300-
400 level Management courses. 

• Marketing: Management 201, Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, and 419. 
Natural Sciences (choose focus area from below): 

• Biology: Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and three hours from any 300-400 
level Biology courses. 

• Chemistry: Chemistry 111 and 113, or 105; 112 and 114, 227, 241, and 
three hours from any 300-400 level Chemistry courses. 

• Physics: Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, and three hours from any 300-400 
level Physics courses. 
 



Computer Science / 153 
 

Courses that count in the Bachelor of Science Data Science major quality point average 
(MQPA):  All courses with “DSCI” prefix; COMP 141, 220, 222, 244, 435; MATH 161, 
162, 213, 214, 222, 331, 201; PSYC 201; MNGT 201, and 202. A minimum MQPA of 
2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in AI and Data Science (22-25 hours) 
 A minor in Data Science will consist of Data Science 215, 431; Computer Science 435, 
445; one of Management 212, 310, 314, or 325; Psychology 201, Mathematics 201, or 
Management 201; and either Mathematics 214 or both Mathematics 222 and Mathematics 
331. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Computer Science (18 hours) 
 A minor in Computer Science will consist of Computer Science 141, 220, 222, and 
nine additional hours of Computer Science courses 200-level and above. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Computer Game Design and Development (18 
hours) 
 A minor in Computer Game Design and Development will consist of Computer Science 
441, 446, and 447; Communication Arts 272; Communication Arts 135 or Design 110; 
Computer Science 401, 402, or 445. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Cybersecurity (18 hours) 
 A minor in Cybersecurity will consist of Computer Science 205, 340, 342, 448, 475, 
and Sociology 221. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in High-Tech Entrepreneurship (18 hours) 
 A minor in High-Tech Entrepreneurship will consist of  Computer Science 401, 402, 
or 442; Computer Science 451 and 452; Entrepreneurship 101 and 301; Entrepreneurship 
317 or 409; and Entrepreneurship 360 or 460 (minimum one hour). 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Mobile Development (18 hours) 
 A minor in Mobile Development will consist of Computer Science 244, 401, 402, 442; 
Design 101 and 210. 
 
 Students who are enrolled in Computer Programming II (COMP 220) may choose to 
change from COMP 220 to Computer Programming I (COMP 141) on or before the fifth 
week of class provided the student did not earn a C or higher in the COMP 141 course. The 
student must have the approval of the current COMP 220 instructor and the instructor of the 
COMP 141 course to which the student intends to move. The student must complete and 
return an Add/Drop Form to the Registrar’s Office. 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

COMPUTER SCIENCE (COMP) 
COMP 141. COMPUTER PROGRAMMING I. This course provides the student with an 
understanding of hardware and software concepts, structured program design, and programming using 
Java in an integrated development environment. Topics include Boolean expressions, iteration, 
standard library classes and methods, arrays, searching and sorting, multidimensional arrays, strings, 
dynamic memory allocation, programmer-defined classes and methods, and deep copying. This course, 
along with Math 161 and 488, fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics 
major. Semester course, three hours. 
 



154 / Grove City College 

COMP 155. INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SCIENCE. This course provides an introduction 
to the field of Computer Science. Topics include creating precise specifications and programming 
solutions for basic computing problems, data representation, and a discussion of topics from the 
breadth of computing such as information systems, artificial intelligence, networks, and the World 
Wide Web. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 205. ETHICS, FAITH, AND THE CONSCIOUS MIND. This course focuses on three 
components of ethics, faith, and philosophy from a computer science perspective. First, it examines 
the Christian theological and philosophical foundations of science and the ethical role of computer 
science in areas such as globalization, autonomous systems, and intellectual property. Second, it 
considers perspectives on the origins, nature, and future of human cognition and consciousness, 
including intersections of artificial intelligence and consciousness. Third, it reviews ethical systems, 
cyberethical professional codes, ethical problem-solving techniques, and specific ethical cases, again 
from a computer science perspective and building on an informed Christian response to technology. 
This course, along with Computer Science 350, fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for 
Computer Science majors. Students may only receive credit for one of Computer Science 205 or 
Science, Faith, & Technology 205. Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211 and 212) and a lab 
science. The lab science may be taken concurrently with this course. This course satisfies the SSFT 
General Education requirement. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 220. COMPUTER PROGRAMMING II. This is a second course in the Java language: a 
review of essential language concepts, structured programming, and top-down design. Object oriented 
program design principles including inheritance, abstract base classes, interfaces, virtual methods, and 
polymorphism are covered. Other topics include generics, linked data structures, and exception 
handling. Prerequisite: Computer Science 141. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMP 222. INTRODUCTION TO DATA STRUCTURES AND ALGORITHMS. An advanced 
course in programming using an object-oriented language, with an emphasis on analyzing the run-time 
behavior of programs; the design and structure of programs; linear data structures; recursion; binary 
search trees; sorting; and hash techniques for searching. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 233. PARALLEL COMPUTING. This course introduces students to C/C++ with an 
emphasis on Parallel and Distributed Computing (PD).  It will include an overview of parallel 
architectures.  Students will program both shared memory and distributed memory systems, with a 
focus on performance evaluations. Students will also explore concurrent (thread-based) programming 
with GUI elements. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 244. DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS. An introduction to database management 
systems emphasizing the relational model. Topics include data manipulation languages (SQL, QBE); 
database design (intuitive design, normalization, and E-R design model); three-tier and multi-tier 
architecture; database security; and database integrity. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220 or 
knowledge of its content. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in computer science. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMP 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
computer science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
COMP 314. AUTOMATA THEORY. This course is an introduction to computation theory including 
the topics: finite automata, regular languages, pushdown automata, context-free languages, Turing 
machines, recursive languages and functions, and computational complexity. Prerequisites: Computer 
Science 220 and Mathematics 213. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



Computer Science / 155 
 

COMP 325. COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND ORGANIZATION. Organization, elementary 
architectural design and computer instruction sets are examined and used via programming in an 
assembly language. Students are given an introduction to the manner in which digital computers 
actually work. Prerequisite: Computer Science 233. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 340. OPERATING SYSTEMS. A study of the basic principles of operating system design 
and implementation including types of computer systems, general architecture of several representative 
computer systems, security, run-time systems, and performance measurement and evaluation. 
Prerequisites: Computer Science 222 and 233. Corequisite: Computer Science 325 or Electrical 
Engineering 204. Semester course, three hours. 
 
COMP 342. DATA COMMUNICATION AND NETWORKING. This class introduces the 
concepts of data communications used in information networks. Topics include equipment utilization 
in information networks; techniques utilized to transmit signals (e.g., modulation, multiplexing, error 
detection, and correction); methods of message handling; network configuration; and software utilized 
in implementing networks. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 350. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING. This course introduces software-engineering 
methodology, covering topics such as development cycles, testing, design, requirements gathering and 
analysis, and project management. Students work in teams on a semester-long project. Software 
Engineering is designed to fulfill the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information 
Literacy (IL) requirements for Computer Science majors. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220 and 
junior standing. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for qualified students that provides an 
opportunity for further computer programming and analysis experience on an individual basis. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
COMP 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
computer science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
COMP 390. SELECTED TOPICS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. An examination of areas of 
computer systems not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each 
offering based on topic. Prerequisites: Computer Science 220 and permission of the department.  
 Semester course, two or three hours. 
 
COMP 401. PRINCIPLES OF iOS PROGRAMMING. The objective of this course is to introduce 
mobile computing with an emphasis on projects and programming iOS devices (e.g. iPad). 
Smartphones, and other Internet-based, highly mobile computing devices, are an increasingly 
important computing platform and driver of software design. This course covers Swift and the iOS 
SDK. Important software design issues, such as input modalities, UI design, and location-aware web 
applications are covered. Students will be provided with development systems. Prerequisite: Computer 
Science 222. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 402. PRINCIPLES OF ANDROID PROGRAMMING. The objective of this course is to 
introduce Android with an emphasis on projects. Android mobile computing devices are an 
increasingly important computing platform. This course covers the Android SDK and teaches students 
how to develop basic Android applications. Students will be provided with development systems. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 222. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 422. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHMS. Topics include fundamental techniques for 
designing efficient algorithms and basic mathematical methods for analyzing their performance; 
paradigms for algorithm design; divide-and-conquer, greedy methods, graph search techniques, 
dynamic programming; design of efficient data structures, and analysis of the running time and space 



156 / Grove City College 

requirements of algorithms in the worst and average cases. Prerequisite: Computer Science 222 and 
Mathematics 213. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 435. INTRODUCTION TO MACHINE LEARNING. Machine learning is an essential part 
of technologies such as image recognition, social network analysis, and autonomous vehicles. This 
course introduces concepts and algorithms that enable computers to learn from experience. Emphasis 
is on the practical application of the algorithms, with some discussion of the underlying mathematics. 
Techniques covered include supervised learning (linear and logistic regression, decision trees, support 
vector machines, and neural networks), unsupervised learning (clustering and dimensionality 
reduction), and time-series data (e.g., hidden Markov models or reinforcement learning). Prerequisites: 
Computer Science 222; and either Mathematics 214 or both Mathematics 222 and one of Mathematics 
331, Psychology 201 or Mathematics 201. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 441. 2D GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course covers concepts and 
methods for the design and development of 2D computer games. Topics include sprites, animation, 
game design, game implementation, and game development environments. Prerequisite: Computer 
Science 222. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 442. WEB PROGRAMMING TECHNOLOGIES. This course prepares students with the 
fundamentals needed to program on the Internet. It offers a survey of programming concepts that yield 
visible or audible results in Web pages and Web-based applications. The course covers effective Web-
page design, various markup languages, several scripting languages, Web servers, and databases to 
provide all the skills and tools needed to create dynamic Web-based applications. Prerequisite: 
Computer Science 220 and 244. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 443. PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES. This course investigates basic concepts of 
programming languages, including functions, types, and scoping. Functional programming is an 
emphasis of the course, including first-order functions, lambda expressions, and referential 
transparency. Prerequisite: Computer Science 222.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 445. INTRODUCTION TO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE. Artificial intelligence topics 
included in this class are: predicate calculus, state space search, knowledge representation, expert 
systems, reasoning in uncertain situations, and machine learning. Prerequisites: Computer Science 222; 
and one of Mathematics 214, Mathematics 331, or Engineering 274.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 446. 3D GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course is a continuation of 
Computer Science 441 and is focused on the development of 3D games and other advanced game 
programming techniques. Topics include graphics, lighting, textures, performance, the 3D pipeline, 
and intentional design. Prerequisite: Computer Science 441.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 447. NETWORKED GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course is a 
continuation of Computer Science 441 and is focused on the development of networked, multiplayer 
console games. Topics include client/server models, synchronization, building code for single and 
multiplayer use, and techniques for lag mitigation. Prerequisites: Computer Science 441.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 448. COMPUTER SECURITY. An overview of software security flaws a programmer 
should be careful to avoid. Students will learn how to avoid these flaws, as well as practice finding 
them in existing code. Additionally, better alternatives will be explored which will allow students to 
make better programs that are less vulnerable to security exploits. Prerequisite: Computer Science 233; 
Corequisite: Computer Science 325. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 451. SENIOR PROJECT I. This course is part of the capstone design experience and is based 
on applying software engineering to a two-semester long project. This course focuses on design. 



Computer Science / 157 
 

Students will write reports and make presentations. This course partially fulfills the Information 
Literacy (IL) requirements for Computer Science majors. Prerequisite: Computer Science 350. 
 Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
COMP 452. SENIOR PROJECT II. This course is a continuation of Computer Science 451 and is 
focused on the development of a working, tested system delivered to a user community. Students will 
write reports, make presentations, and deliver a working software system. This course fulfills the 
Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for 
Computer Science majors. Prerequisite: Computer Science 451. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for qualified students that provides an 
opportunity for further computer programming and analysis experience on an individual basis. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
COMP 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
computer science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
COMP 475. ADVANCED SECURITY. A more comprehensive study of computer security, 
including the goals of secure computing; elementary cryptography; and system and network security. 
Practical applications of these ideas are provided by an investigation of secure systems administration 
by means of team-based security projects. Various legal and ethical issues in the field are also 
considered. Prerequisites: Computer Science 205, 342, and 448. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
COMP 480. INTERNSHIP IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. Students earn academic credit for field 
experience that allows them to use their computer skills under the supervision of a cooperating entity. 
A maximum of six credit hours may be applied toward the major. Junior standing and permission of 
the department chair are required. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
COMP 499. HONORS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. A course for qualified junior or senior students 
who are interested in an advanced computer-science experience. The course has a significant research 
component, including system development, review of literature, and writing. Topics change with each 
offering depending on the interests of the faculty member teaching the course. Prerequisite: Permission 
of the instructor and department chair. Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 

DATA SCIENCE (DSCI) 
DSCI 144. INTRODUCTION TO DATA SCIENCE. An introduction to methods and tools used to 
analyze and understand data. Topics include computer programming in Python and common toolkits 
for data analysis and visualization. Students engage in hands-on analysis of real-world data sets and 
discuss social issues related to data analysis.  
 Fall semester only (expected to start: Fall 2021), three hours. 
 
DSCI 215. STATISTICAL COMPUTING. This course will focus on the tools required to process 
large data sets using current statistical software and software packages. Code segments for simple 
statistical tests as well as more complex statistical analyses will be developed. Software selection may 
change based on current statistical practice. Prerequisite: Computer Science 141, and one of 
Management 201, Mathematics 201, or Psychology 201.  
 Spring semester only (expected to start: Spring 2022), three hours. 
 
DSCI 431. INTRODUCTION TO BIG DATA. The objective of this course is to introduce key 
concepts and technologies of big data management. This course covers big data characteristics, storage, 
and processing. Students learn how to use multiple big data technologies, such as stream processing, 
in-memory databases, Hadoop MapReduce, NoSQL, and NewSQL systems. Prerequisites: Computer 
Science 220 and 244. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 



158 / Grove City College 

DSCI 450. APPLIED MODELING AND VISUALIZATION. The capstone course in data science. 
Students apply modeling and visualization techniques to a large project, giving presentations about 
their results and writing a report. Legal and ethical issues in data science are examined. Prerequisites: 
MATH 213 or MATH 331; MATH 214 or MATH 222; DSCI 144; DSCI 215; COMP 222; COMP 
244; DSCI 431 or COMP 435. Spring semester only (expected start: Spring 2022), three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS AND SOCIOLOGY 
Dr. Herbener, Chair; Dr. Ayers, Dr. Frank, Dr. Fuller, Dr. Ritenour.  
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Economics—58 hours 
 Core Requirements (27 hours): 

Economics 101, 102, 120, 301, 302, 342, 407, 408, and 420.  
        Economics Electives (15 hours): 

Fifteen hours from the following: 
Economics 202, 204, 206, 207, 213, 214, 215, 216, 260, 270, 290, 303, 306, 309, 
310, 360, 370, 390, 401, 402, 404, 456, 460, 470, 480 (3 cr max), and 499. 

 Major-Related Requirement (16 hours): 
Philosophy 161, 211; Management 201; Mathematics 141 or 161*; and Sociology 
101. 
 

Courses that count in the Economics major quality point average (MQPA): 
All courses with “ECON” prefix. A minimum of 2.00 MQPA is required to graduate. 

 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Economics—70 
hours 

Business Core Requirements (36 hours) 
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103, 
111, 201, 214, 303, 304, 486; and Marketing 104 

Economics Core (30 hours): 
Economics 101, 102, 120, 216, 301, 302, 310, 401, 402, and 456. 

Major-Related Course (4 hours): 
Mathematics 141 or 161*. 

*Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but 
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261. 

 
Courses that count in the Business Economics major quality point average (MQPA):  

All courses with “ACCT”, “ECON”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, 
excluding FNCE 105 and MNGT 106. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 Students who have completed a major in Economics or Business Economics should be 
able to perform and present economic analysis and understand and critique the economic 
analysis of others. To attain these ends, they need to develop skills in locating, evaluating, 
and using information and proficiency in writing and speaking. To give students a forum to 
demonstrate their mastery of these skills, the Department of Economics requires Economics 
420 as a Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) 
course for Economics majors, and Management 214 as WI and IL and Management 486 as 
SI for Business Economics majors. 
 
 



Economics and Sociology / 159 
 

Course requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Sociology—38 hours 
Core Requirements (14 hours): 

 Sociology 101, 201, 377, 452, and 473. 
Elective Requirements (15 hours): 

Fifteen hours from any additional sociology courses including the following:  
Sociology 103, 203, 208, 221, 233, 241, 251, 260, 270, 290, 308, 312, 314, 315, 
321, 331, 356, 360, 370, 375, 390, 460, 470, 480, and 499. 

        Major-Related Courses (9 Hours): 
  Economics 101; Psychology 201, 208. 
 
Courses that count in the Sociology major quality point average (MQPA): 

All courses with “SOCI” prefix; ECON 101; PSYC 201 and 208. A minimum MQPA 
of 2.00 is required to graduate. 

 
 Sociology majors are provided with focused, discipline-specific instruction in 
professional writing by taking the Writing Intensive (WI) course Sociology 377 Social 
Research Methods, and in professional speaking by taking the Speaking Intensive (SI) 
course Sociology 452 Sociology Colloquium. Information Literacy (IL) instruction is also 
incorporated in Sociology 377, focusing on knowledge and use of electronic information 
technology and resources, critically assessing this information, and teaching skills that 
explore scholarly research and publishing processes within the field of Sociology. 
 
Course requirements for a minor in Criminal Justice Studies (19 hours) 
 A minor in Criminal Justice Studies will consist of Sociology 101, 377, and four 
courses from Sociology 203, 221, 233, 314, 315, 331, or Economics 402. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Economics (21 hours) 
 A minor in Economics will consist of Economics 101, 102, 120, and twelve additional 
hours in economics. 
 
Course requirements for a minor in Family Studies (19 hours) 
 A minor in Family Studies will consist of Psychology 201; Sociology 312; one course 
from Psychology 204, Political Science 277, or Sociology 377; and three courses from 
Psychology 209, 211, 322, or Sociology 251. 
 
Course requirements for a minor in Sociology (19 hours) 
 A minor in Sociology will consist of Sociology 101, 377, 473, and nine additional hours 
of Sociology coursework. 

 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ECONOMICS (ECON) 
ECON 101. PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS (MICRO) I. An examination of the fundamental 
principles of human action and the laws of the market economy. Focus will be on exchange, prices, 
production, costs, entrepreneurship, and government intervention. Three hours. 
 
ECON 102. PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS (MACRO) II. An examination of the fundamental 
principles of human action and the laws of the market economy. Focus will be on money, inflation, 
credit, interest, capital, economic progress, and business cycles. Three hours. 
 



160 / Grove City College 

ECON 120. FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMICS. An investigation of the theological, philosophical 
and epistemological foundations of economics. The nature of man and the created world, laws of action 
and interaction, and the good society will be explored. Three hours. 
 
ECON 202. ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT. A study of economic progress 
with emphasis on the developing world. Topics include wealth, poverty, capital accumulation, and 
foreign aid. Three hours. 
 
ECON 204. ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS. An investigation of environmental, conservation, 
and population issues. Pollution, natural resource use, demographic changes, and technology will be 
studied. Three hours. 
 
ECON 206. COMPARATIVE ECONOMIC SYSTEMS. An analysis of different economic 
systems. The command economy, various forms of the mixed economy, different types of 
interventionism, and the market economy will be compared and contrasted. Three hours. 
 
ECON 207. LABOR ECONOMICS. An analysis of the working of labor markets. Labor unions and 
labor legislation and regulation will be examined. Three hours. 
 
ECON 213. AMERICAN ECONOMIC HISTORY TO 1860. A survey of the American economy 
from colonial days to the Civil War. Economic progress and business cycles will be examined with 
emphasis on how the market economy was developed by entrepreneurs and hampered by politicians.
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 214. AMERICAN ECONOMIC HISTORY SINCE 1860. A survey of the American 
economy from the Civil War to the present. Economic growth and business cycles will be examined 
with emphasis on how the market economy was developed by entrepreneurs and hampered by 
politicians. Three hours. 
 
ECON 215. URBAN AND RURAL ECONOMICS. An examination of the spatial aspects of 
economic activity. Location decisions of production facilities by entrepreneurs and households by 
families will be examined with an emphasis on the changes in cities and rural areas as an aspect of 
economic development.                Three hours. 
 
ECON 216. ECONOMICS OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An examination of entrepreneurship both 
theoretically and in applied issues including innovation, growth, financing, strategy, institutional 
environment, and policy. Three hours. 
 
ECON 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in economics. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
economics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Three hours. 
 
ECON 290. STUDIES IN ECONOMICS. Studies in areas of economics not covered by regular 
departmental offerings. Three hours. 
 
ECON 301. INTERMEDIATE MICROECONOMICS. A study of prices and production. Utility, 
costs, competition, and equilibrium will be examined. Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 102.  
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 302. INTERMEDIATE MACROECONOMICS. A study of economic progress and 
business cycles. Keynesian, Monetarist, Austrian, and other views will be examined. Prerequisites: 
Economics 101 and 102. Three hours. 
 



Economics and Sociology / 161 
 

ECON 303. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS. An examination of the worldwide market 
economy. The movement of goods, people, capital, and money across political borders and political 
interference with the market will be investigated. Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 102. Three hours. 
 
ECON 306. AUSTRIAN ECONOMICS. An examination of the lives and thoughts of Austrian 
school economists. Contributions in monetary, capital, and business cycle theory, methodology, 
economic calculation, entrepreneurship, and other areas will be highlighted. Three hours. 
 
ECON 309. PUBLIC POLICY. An analysis of current public policy. Topics include labor and anti-
trust regulations, education and energy policies, welfare programs, and price and wage controls.  
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 310. INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION. A study of how producers seek to satisfy demand in 
different market environments they face. The structure and activities of industries and the effects of 
these on competition, prices, and resource allocation in the economy will be examined. Prerequisite: 
Economics 101. Three hours. 
 
ECON 342. INTRODUCTION TO ECONOMETRICS. This course explores probability theory, 
hypothesis testing, simple and multiple regression analysis, specification of econometric models, and 
introduces quasi-experimental techniques. Emphasis is placed on application of econometric 
techniques in estimating economic relationships. Prerequisites: Management 201 and Mathematics 
141.  Three hours. 
 
ECON 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of special topics in economics. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. Three hours. 
 
ECON 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
economics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 390. STUDIES IN ECONOMICS. Studies in areas of economics not covered by regular 
departmental offerings. Three hours. 
 
ECON 401. MONEY AND BANKING. A study of money and credit. Inflation, interest rates, and 
various monetary and banking regimes will be investigated. Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 102.  
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 402. LAW AND ECONOMICS. An economic analysis of law’s traditional categories: 
property, tort, contract, and criminal. This course will follow the outline of traditional courses in law 
and economics but will also devote time to the critiques that have been leveled against law and 
economics.  Prerequisite: Economics 101 or 120.  Three hours. 
 
ECON 404. PUBLIC FINANCE. An examination of the types of and justifications for government 
activity. Taxation, expenditures, debt, and monetary inflation will be explored. Prerequisites: 
Economics 101 and 102. Three hours. 
 
ECON 407. HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT TO 1870. A study of the prominent figures 
in the development of economic thought and the major schools of economic thought from the ancient 
Greeks through the British classical school. Insights into current debates about economic theory will 
be highlighted. Three hours. 
 
ECON 408. HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT SINCE 1870. A study of the prominent 
figures in the development of economic thought and the major schools of economic thought from the 
beginning of the marginalist revolution to the present. Insights into current debates about economic 
theory will be highlighted. Three hours. 
 



162 / Grove City College 

ECON 420. ECONOMICS COLLOQUIUM. An immersion into the activities of scholars: writing, 
presenting, critiquing, and debating. Students will lead and participate in discussions of articles and 
books, write and present their own research, and critique the research of other students. This course 
satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) 
requirements for the Economics major. Prerequisites: Senior standing or permission of the department 
chair. Three hours. 
 
ECON 456. FINANCIAL MARKETS AND INSTITUTIONS. A study of the nature, origin, 
working and development of financial markets and institutions. Topics include the markets for and 
institutions offering credit, equities, and derivatives. Prerequisite: Economics 101 and 102. 
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of special topics in economics. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. Three hours. 
 
ECON 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
economics. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Three hours. 
 
ECON 480. INTERNSHIP IN ECONOMICS. Practical experience in applied economics. 
Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair. Three hours. 
 
ECON 488. SEMINAR IN ECONOMICS. An advanced course for juniors and seniors who desire 
in-depth exploration of a specific topic in economics using research, discussion, oral reports and 
written essays. Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair. Three hours. 
 
ECON 499. HONORS IN ECONOMICS. Advanced research in economics by seniors who have 
shown unusual aptitude in economics. Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair.  Three hours. 

SOCIOLOGY (SOCI) 
SOCI 101. FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIOLOGY. An introductory study of the major and enduring 
theoretical ideas, concepts, methods, and debates that have shaped and informed the discipline of 
sociology from its inception to the current day. Topics include the origins of the discipline, the social 
conditions under which humans may thrive, social order, religion, and inequality. Attention is also paid 
to the ways in which the Christian tradition perceives and, in some cases, may challenge contemporary 
social conditions. Recommended to precede all other sociology courses. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 103. FOUNDATIONS OF CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY. An introduction to the study 
of culture, its meaning and significance for human beings, and the ways in which man organizes his 
activities to meet universal human needs, especially in simpler societies. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 105. PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIOLOGY. A one-credit course for students wishing to meet 
the College’s “Foundations of Social Sciences” general education requirement by transferring in a 
standard introduction to sociology course taken elsewhere, that provides the unique content within 
Grove City College’s Sociology 101 Foundations of Sociology course. The following themes are 
covered: epistemological foundations of sociology, sociological views of human beings and their 
actions, foundations of social order, engines of social progress, and sociological understandings of the 
divine. Prerequisite: A Sociology 101 comparable class transferred from another institution.   
 Three hours. 
 
SOCI 201. SOCIAL PROBLEMS. An analysis of American social problems such as family, 
sexuality, drugs, crime, health, poverty, race, and global problems such as population, the environment, 
religion, war and terrorism. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 203. SOCIOLOGY OF DEVIANT BEHAVIOR. A study of the social aspects of personal 
deviation including consideration of the alcoholic, the drug addict, the suicidal and the sexually 



Economics and Sociology / 163 
 

maladjusted from the perspective of social background, causative factors, and possible therapy. 
Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or 201. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 208. GERONTOLOGY. A general introduction to gerontology, with emphasis on the 
normative aspects of aging and adaptation to old age. Topics include the role of senior citizens in the 
family and a youth-oriented culture, theories of disengagement, role activity in retirement and aging 
from a cross-cultural perspective.  Three hours. 
 
SOCI 221. WHITE COLLAR CRIME. An in-depth examination of important concepts, theories, 
and facts related to white collar crime, using case studies, academic lectures, guest lecturers and films. 
The degree to which such crimes occur, as well as their economic and social costs, will be considered. 
Victims and offenders will be described. Legal issues and problems in dealing with white collar crime 
will also be considered, with a special consideration of the typical legal, political, and cultural barriers 
encountered in trying to create and enforce relevant laws, including detection and punishments.  
 Three hours. 
 
SOCI 233. INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE. An overview of every element of the 
criminal justice system, looking at the process of handling offenders from crime detection through 
arrest, adjudication, prosecution/defense, sentencing, incarceration, probation, and parole. Issues of 
criminal law (ethics, philosophy, and basic structure and rules) and policy, defendants, victims, and 
the roles of different criminal justice agents will also be considered. Biblical perspectives will be 
examined throughout, as will, where appropriate, private alternatives to response to crime.  
 Three hours. 
 
SOCI 241. MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY. A study of the social and cultural aspects of medicine 
and health, strongly emphasizing the results of cross-cultural and comparative research. Topics include 
health professionals and services around the world, alternative healers, the demography of health and 
illness, and privatized versus government-sponsored health care systems. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 251. COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE. A general introduction to marriage and the family that 
emphasizes practical living. Topics include dating, courtship, engagement, marriage, romantic love, 
and marital adjustment across the lifespan. Also included are discussions of singleness, parenting, and 
divorce. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in sociology. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 One, two or three hours. 
 
SOCI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
sociology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours 
. 
SOCI 290. STUDIES IN SOCIOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester, involves the 
examination of different areas of sociology with a focus on new areas not covered in regular 
coursework. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 308. SOCIOLOGY OF RELIGION. This course will examine religion from a sociological 
perspective, including such topics as sociological theories about religion, how religion affects 
individuals and societies, secularization and worldwide religious resurgence, effects of globalization 
upon religion, America’s contemporary religious climate, contemporary American Evangelicalism, 
and the future of religion. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 312. THE FAMILY AS A SOCIAL INSTITUTION. A course that focuses upon the status, 
development, and future of the modern American family from historical, cross-cultural, and 
sociological perspectives. Examines contemporary debates over legal definitions of “family”, patterns 
of family structure, families and the elderly, family policy, and reviews non-governmental approaches 



164 / Grove City College 

to strengthening the family. Recommended for those students contemplating careers in teaching, the 
helping professions, ministry, public policy, and research. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 314. CRIMINOLOGY. An introduction to the scientific study of crime. This includes classical 
and modern criminological theories and methods, various types of criminal behavior and what triggers 
them, social and environmental factors that affect levels of crime, comparisons of crime rates across 
place and time. Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or 201. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCI 315. JUVENILE DELINQUENCY. An examination of the meaning of juvenile delinquency 
and the social institutions and psychological phenomena that shape juveniles. Significant trends in 
delinquency will be highlighted.  Three hours. 
 
SOCI 321. SOCIAL CHANGE. An analysis of patterns, mechanisms and strategies of past and future 
social change in a rapidly changing world. Social and political movement theory, revolutions, the force 
of religion in social movement activism, and recent changes in American society are considered. 
Prerequisite: Sociology 101. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 331. LAW AND SOCIETY. An exploration of the relationship among law, legal systems, and 
social structure. Topics include the origin and development of law, sociological theories of law, the 
relationship of Christianity and the law in the West, analysis and cross-cultural comparisons of dispute 
resolutions and other judicial processes (includes legal anthropology), comparisons of modern legal 
systems, the social psychology of legal decision-making including jury studies, and the legal 
profession. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 356. POVERTY AND STRATIFICATION. An overview of the nature and extent of poverty 
and stratification in the United States and the world, including consideration of empirical data, 
sociological theory, and Christian perspectives. Special attention will be given to private, faith-based 
solutions to chronic poverty. Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or 201. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Available to students with a minimum of twelve hours in 
sociology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
SOCI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
sociology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
SOCI 375. GLOBAL SOCIETY. An investigation of how the dynamics of social order are impacted 
by the development of a global social order, including Christian perspectives on global order.  
 Three hours. 
 
SOCI 377. SOCIAL RESEARCH METHODS. This course will study the basic methods for social 
research. This includes selecting topics, developing and operationalizing concepts, sampling, 
establishing causal relations, data collection using secondary (especially aggregate and comparative) 
sources, content analysis and other unobtrusive approaches, surveys, field research, interviews, 
experiments. The weekly lab will focus on creating databases for a computer statistical package; 
coding, entering and analyzing data, and writing professional research reports. This class will fulfill 
the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Sociology major. 
Prerequisites: Sociology 101 and Psychology 201.  
 Alternate years (odd), fall semester only, four hours. 
 
SOCI 390. STUDIES IN SOCIOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester, involves the 
examination of different areas of sociology with a focus on new areas not covered in regular 
coursework. Three hours. 
 
SOCI 452. SOCIOLOGY COLLOQUIUM. Guided intensive study of a specific sociological 
problem or topic under the guidance of one Sociology faculty member, and training in the art of 



Economics and Sociology / 165 
 

professional speaking in the field. Students will orally present and defend their study proposals and 
completed final projects before the Sociology faculty and other students in the class. This course fulfills 
the discipline-specific Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for Sociology majors. Prerequisite: junior 
status. One hour. 
 
SOCI 473. SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY. Overview of major schools of Sociological Theory with a 
focus on major thinkers and the central questions that have historically animated the discipline. These 
include: Functionalism, Conflict and Critical Theories including Marxism and World Systems Theory, 
Exchange and Rational Choice, Post-Modern, Symbolic Interactionism, Phenomenology and 
Ethnomethodology. Prerequisites: Sociology 101 and junior standing in the Sociology major, or 
Instructor’s permission. Alternate years (even), spring semester only, three hours 
 
SOCI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Available to students with a minimum of twelve hours in 
sociology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
SOCI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
sociology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
SOCI 480. INTERNSHIP IN SOCIOLOGY. This course offers practical experience appropriate for 
the sociology field. Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair. 
 Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
SOCI 499. HONORS IN SOCIOLOGY. Open only to seniors who have honors grades and who have 
completed a minimum of fifteen hours in the department. Application must be made to the department 
and a proposal for the study must be approved before registering. The student studies under the 
guidance of department staff. Prerequisite: Fifteen hours in sociology including Sociology 377. One, 
two or three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Dr. Nichols, Chair; Dr. Chapman, Associate Chair; Dr. Blackburn, Dr. Culbertson, Dr. 
Dreves, Dr. Fecich, Dr. Natalie Heisey, Mrs. Munson, Dr. Sabousky. Adjunct: Mrs. Martin. 
Additional Instructional Faculty: Mrs. Bodamer, Mrs. Herald, Mr. Omasits, Mrs. Sarah 
Potter, Mrs. Liz Rupnik. 
 
 The Education Department of Grove City College embraces the mission, goals, and 
objectives of the College while implementing standards established for teacher education 
by the state of Pennsylvania and as recommended by research in the field of education. The 
faculty of the Education Department supports these objectives and standards and seeks to 
provide the specialized knowledge required by the education profession. Department faculty 
and staff members dedicate themselves to assist Grove City College pre-service teachers 
gain an understanding of the craft while supplying them with ample field experiences to 
practice the art of teaching. 
 Pedagogical, intellectual, and professional knowledge represent the tools of the 
teaching craft. These tools are selected so that our pre-service teachers possess the skills 
they need to plan, assess, and adapt instruction to various ethnicities, socio-economic 
groups, learning styles, and learning capabilities. We are united in our commitment to 
supply our pre-service teachers with the necessary capabilities to be successful in teaching 
to the whole person when they leave our mentoring and enter their own classrooms. 
 Education majors who are planning to become teachers or to pursue graduate studies 
following graduation should strive to be good writers and speakers and to know how to find, 
analyze, and use information. To that end, Education 488 is a Writing Intensive (WI) and 
Speaking Intensive (SI) course. Education 203 and 488 are Information Literacy (IL) 



166 / Grove City College 

courses designed to provide the necessary skills for Education majors to use electronic 
information technology and resources and explore scholarly research within the field of 
education. 

CERTIFICATION OF TEACHERS 
 Grove City College is approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Education to offer 
certification programs in the areas of Elementary, Elementary with Middle Level, Middle 
Level, Elementary with Special Education, Foreign Language K-12, and Secondary School 
Education in any of the following subject areas:   Biology, Chemistry, English (also with 
communications), Foreign Language (French and Spanish), Mathematics, Music, Physics, 
Social Sciences, and interdisciplinary fields of General Science - Biology, Chemistry, and 
Physics. Middle-level certification includes a broad range of teaching preparation along 
with two content area studies: Science and Math, Science and English, Science and History, 
Math and English, Math and History.  Secondary certification students work closely 
between the Education Department and their content areas to complete courses 
recommended to meet requirements for the subject area education major and also the 
professional education course requirements. 
 Teachers are prepared for careers in public and private education across a wide variety 
of roles in public, private, international, and additional fields within education.  The 
Department of Education offers in depth career counselling throughout the education 
development of students, and after graduation.  Additionally, the Department offers the 
services of a Certification Officer to assist students in meeting requirements for teacher 
licensure.   Pennsylvania Teacher licensure includes the Instructional I Certificate is issued 
by the Pennsylvania Department of Education to those Grove City College graduates who 
have completed an approved college program, successfully fulfilled Pennsylvania Teacher 
Certification requirements (including required testing, Act 33, Act 34, Act 114 clearances 
and other state requirements), and have been recommended by the College for certification.  
Additional areas of study (as approved by the PA Department of Education), such as the 
Integrative Science Technology Engineering Mathematics Endorsement may also be 
completed upon completion of approved program and fulfillment of state requirements.  
 It should be noted that graduation and certification are not synonymous terms. All 
students seeking certification must apply to the Department of Education for admission to 
the certification program. Admission, retention, and recommendation for certification are 
contingent upon the approval of the Department of Education and the faculty of the student's 
area of certification. Education Majors must meet the entry testing requirements articulated 
by the Pennsylvania Department of Education prior to formal admission into the 
certification program. 
 Changes in state licensure requirements may necessitate changes in course 
requirements for students, particularly for those students who extend their studies beyond 
the typical four-year sequence. Careful attention to Education Department 
recommendations for course scheduling is important for staying current with certification 
requirements. 

SCHOLASTIC REQUIREMENTS, ADMISSION AND RETENTION 
 All students wishing to enter the teacher education program must make formal 
application for admittance and receive acceptance in accordance with admission 
requirements. Students seeking admission as credential candidates should make formal 
application by November 1 of the sophomore year. Non-traditional (returning) students 
are advised on an individual basis (see Student Life section). 
 All students will be required to have a 3.00 Career Quality Point Average (CQPA) to 
be certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This requirement reflects provisions as 
stated by Chapter 354, passed by the Pennsylvania State Board of Education in May 2000. 



Education / 167 
 

 In order that students may meet the above standard, the Education Department monitors 
progress. Students must maintain a minimal CQPA and MQPA as they advance through 
each academic year. These QPA requirements are detailed in the Education Department 
Handbook. Students are, therefore, advised to reference this source for further information. 
 Students seeking Endorsement programs may have additional requirements to meet, 
including making progress on initial certification requirements and admittance to the 
endorsement program.  
 
POLICY GOVERNING COURSE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATION 
ONLY TEACHER CANDIDATES 
 For those teacher candidates who are already certified in some area and seek 
certification at Grove City College in an additional area, the following guidelines are to be 
followed contingent upon Grove City College and Pennsylvania Department of Education 
guidelines: 

• Candidates who have already taken courses in the area in which they seek 
certification must take at least 50% of the courses required for this certification at 
Grove City College. 

• Candidates who start with no hours in the additional area of certification may only 
transfer six hours to Grove City College without special advance permission from 
the department head in their new area of certification. 

• Candidates seeking certification must have a minimum career QPA of 3.00 and a 
minimum major QPA of 2.75 to enter the Grove City College program. 

 
 For candidates who have no certification but have a degree from a regionally accredited 
college or university, these guidelines are to be followed, contingent upon Grove City 
College and Pennsylvania Department of Education guidelines: 

• Candidates who have had the required hours in their major (as shown on their status 
sheet) but require education courses for certification must take all of their education 
courses at Grove City College. (Under certain conditions up to six hours may be 
taken elsewhere with prior approval.) Candidates who have the required hours in 
their major may, however, be required to take up to fifteen additional hours in their 
subject area at the discretion of their subject area advisor. 

• Candidates who have had their hours in education (as shown on their status sheet) 
but have not had the required subject area courses must take all of their subject area 
courses at Grove City College. (Under certain conditions up to six hours may be 
taken elsewhere with prior approval.) 

• Candidates who have not had the required education and subject area courses will 
follow both of the above guidelines. 

• Candidates must have completed the teacher education core curriculum courses. 
• Candidates who have already earned an undergraduate degree must have a 

minimum career QPA of 3.00 and a minimum major QPA of 2.75 to enter the Grove 
City College program. 

• Additional requirements for certification may include passing scores on the Praxis 
exam. 
 

REQUIREMENTS FOR TEACHING IN OTHER STATES 
 Students seeking certification in states other than Pennsylvania should consult the 
credential officer in the Department of Education and research licensure requirements 
through specific state departments, offices, and/or bureaus of education. 

 



168 / Grove City College 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 
 International Students, who are not US citizens and who are interested in certification 
to teach, are advised to consult with the credential officer in the Department of Education 
for further information. The Pennsylvania Department of Education currently requires that 
candidates for certification be US Citizens or those who have signed a “declaration of 
intent” to become a US Citizen.  
 
TEACHER'S EXAMINATIONS 
 Credential candidates must successfully complete the appropriate sections of the 
National Teachers Examination for certification in Pennsylvania or other states. Test 
information is available via the Department of Education Career Services website. 
 
ELEMENTARY, SPECIAL EDUCATION, and MIDDLE LEVEL PROGRAMS 
 Students completing programs of study that lead to certification for teaching may be 
required to complete more than the standard 128 hours required to graduate from Grove 
City College and may also incur additional tuition charges. Program requirements and other 
specific details are available in the Education Department Office. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Elementary Education—73 
hours 

Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Mathematics 151, 152; Music Education 315; 
Psychology 102 and 209. 

Education Core Requirements (58 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 342, 343, 381, 382, 
383, 441, 443, 488; and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed 
Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the 
Education 202 requirement. 
 

Courses that count in the Elementary Education major quality point average 
(MQPA):   
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix, PSYC 102, 209, and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA 
of 2.00 is required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required 
for certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with 
Elementary Education—92 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Mathematics 151, 152; Music Education 315; 
Psychology 102 and 209. 

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 342, 343, 441, 488; 
Special Education 411 and 412. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

Dual Certification in Special Education Requirements (24 hours): 
Special Education 101, 103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, and 309. 

 
 
 
 



Education / 169 
 

Courses that count in the Special Education with Elementary Education major quality 
point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the 
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a 
concentration in Elementary Education—90 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (12 hours): 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102, and 209. 

Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 488; Special Education 
103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, 411, 412, and 413. *Note: Students who 
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

Concentration in Elementary Education (9 hours): 
Special Education 101; Education 324, 328, and one of Art 321, Exercise Science 
228, or Music Education 315. 

 
Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Elementary 
Education major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the 
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a 
concentration in Middle Level Education—91 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (12 hours): 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102, and 209. 

Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 488; Special Education 
103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, 411, 412, and 413. *Note: Students who 
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

Concentration in Middle Level Education (10 hours): 
Special Education 101; Education 324, 329, and 381. 

 
Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Middle Level 
Education major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the 
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a 
concentration in Secondary Education—86 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (6 hours): 
Psychology 102, and 209. 

Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 488; Special Education 
103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, 411, 412, and 413. *Note: Students who 



170 / Grove City College 

completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

 
Concentration in Secondary Education (11 hours): 

Special Education 102; Education 215, 371, and two secondary content courses 
(minimum six hours) from the same department choosing from Biology, Chemistry, 
English, History/Social Studies, Mathematics, and Physics. Note: any MATH 
courses taken for the Quantitative/Logical Reasoning requirement may not be used 
for this requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Secondary 
Education major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the 
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/English 
Education—99 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (27 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.  

Math/English Content (18 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); and three COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 
hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, 
Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378. 

Education Core Requirements (54 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 442, 
444, 488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/English Education major quality point 
average (MQPA): 
    All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required 
to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/History 
Education—90 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (27 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course. 

Math Content (9 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses. 

Education Core Requirements (54 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 442, 
444, 488; and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 



Education / 171 
 

Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/History Education major quality point 
average (MQPA): 

All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/English 
Education—94 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/English Content (25 hours): 
Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 
or Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course; and three 
COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 
204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.  

Education Core Requirements (54 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 442, 
444, 488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/English Education major quality point 
average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/History 
Education—85 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (9 hours): 
Math 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/History Content (22 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; Science 
201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or 
Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course. 

Education Core Requirements (54 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 442, 
444, 488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/History Education major quality point 
average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
 
 



172 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/Math 
Education—94 hours 

 
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 

History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/Math Content (25 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or Chemistry lab course; and one additional 
four-credit science course. 

Education Core Requirements (54 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 442, 
444, 488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/Math Education major quality point 
average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/English 
and Elementary Education—113 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (27 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.  

Math/English Content (18 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); and three COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 
hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, 
Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378. 

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 441, 444, 
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while 
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement. 

Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Music Education 315; Psychology 209; Education 
281, 328, 342, 343. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/English and Elementary Education 
major quality point average (MQPA): 
    All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required 
to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/History 
and Elementary Education—114 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (27 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course. 



Education / 173 
 

Math Content (9 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses. 

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 441, 444, 
488; and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Music Education 315; Psychology 209; Education 
281, 328, 342, 343. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/History and Elementary Education 
major quality point average (MQPA): 

All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/English 
and Elementary Education—108 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/English Content (25 hours): 
Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 
or Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course; and three 
COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 
204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.  

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 441, 444, 
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while 
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement. 

Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Music Education 315; Psychology 209; Education 
281, 328, 342, 343. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/English and Elementary Education 
major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/History 
and Elementary Education—99 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (9 hours): 
Math 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/History Content (22 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; Science 
201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or 
Chemistry lab course; and one additional four-credit science course. 

 
 



174 / Grove City College 

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 441, 444, 
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while 
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement. 

Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Music Education 315; Psychology 209; Education 
281, 328, 342, 343. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/History and Elementary Education 
major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/Math 
and Elementary Education—108 hours 

Liberal Arts Core (15 hours): 
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; 
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102. 

Science/Math Content (25 hours): 
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 
202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or Chemistry lab course; and one additional 
four-credit science course. 

Education Core Requirements (53 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 441, 444, 
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while 
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement. 

Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours): 
Art 321; Exercise Science 228; Music Education 315; Psychology 209; Education 
281, 328, 342, 343. 

 
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/Math and Elementary Education 
major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is 
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 
 
INTEGRATIVE SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY ENGINEERING AND 
MATHEMATICS K-12 ENDORSEMENT PROGRAM (INTEGRATIVE STEM 
ENDORSEMENT) 
 The Integrative Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics K-12 
Endorsement Program is intended to improve a teacher’s skills in dealing with complex 
classroom settings in the emerging area of STEM Education. This endorsement may be 
added to existing Level I or Level II Certificates. 
 To be admitted into a STEM Endorsement Program, candidates must be enrolled in an 
approved Level I program or hold a Level I or II certificate. Completion of the STEM 
Endorsement Program may include completing courses outside of the regular fall and spring 
semester offerings (such as summer and January terms). 
 



Education / 175 
 

Course requirements for an Integrative STEM Education Endorsement (12 hours) 
 An endorsement in Integrative STEM Education will consist of Education 510, 511, 
512, and 513. 

EDUCATION (EDUC) 
EDUC 202. INTRODUCTION TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A study of the pedagogical 
framework of education with emphasis on the legal and organizational issues related to American 
institutions of education.  This includes an analysis of the current reform movements and in impact 
upon the role of the professional educator.  Education majors must complete and may only receive 
credit for one of Education 202 or the combination of Education 205 and 206.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 203. CULTURALLY RELEVANT PEDAGOGY. A study of the characteristics and 
educational needs of learners from diverse cultural backgrounds. The course is designed to equip 
educators with methods to address the educational needs of culturally diverse groups and students from 
limited English backgrounds. This course satisfies the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for PreK-
4 Elementary and Middle Level Education majors. Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology 102. 
For education majors only.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 204. TECHNOLOGIES OF INSTRUCTION. An introduction to educational media with an 
emphasis on applications of computer technology in education; general models for computer usage in 
education and educational institutions; and case studies of specific projects in terms of approach, 
effectiveness, and implications for the future. Emphasis will be on the application of educational media 
and technology within the K-12 school curriculum. For education majors only. 
  Semester course, three hours. 
EDUC 205. OVERVIEW OF THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A study of the pedagogical 
framework of education with emphasis on the legal and organizational issues related to American 
institutions of education.  This includes an analysis of the current reform movements and impact upon 
the role of the professional educator.  Education majors must complete and may only receive credit for 
one of Education 202 or the combination of Education 205 and 206. Prerequisite: Dual Enrollment 
Program students only. Spring semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 206. CLINICAL INTRODUCTION TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A classroom 
extension of Education 205 with a focus on face to face teaching and the required in-school field 
experience. Education majors must complete and may only receive credit for one of Education 202 or 
the combination of Education 205 and 206. Prerequisite: Education 205. 
 Fall semester course, one hour.   
 
EDUC 215. SECONDARY CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION I. This course provides an 
overview of all curriculum components essential for operating a secondary education classroom. Major 
curriculum approaches are explored, and students are expected to complete unit planning skills 
implementing these approaches. Additional focus will be on classroom management strategies, school 
setting and culture, selecting course materials, and introduction to professionalism/ethics. 
Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology 102.  Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 228. SURVEY OF ADOLESCENT LITERATURE. A survey of young adult literature for 
educators teaching in upper elementary, middle grades (4-8) with an extensive representation of books 
from classic and contemporary authors. Major literary genres are studied, trends in adolescent literature 
are discussed, and issues in selecting and using literature in the 4-8 classrooms are explored. Priority 
given to Middle Level and English Secondary Education Certification majors.   
 Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
EDUC 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in education. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



176 / Grove City College 

EDUC 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
education. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EDUC 281. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). This one-credit 
field experience is an internship course designed to permit beginning level early education students to 
engage in a semester-long field experience in the Early Education Center. This course is required for 
Early Childhood certification. Freshman or sophomore level course. Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 305. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION. This course is 
divided into sections by specific secondary certification areas. The course is designed to prepare 
secondary credential candidates with the ability to apply basic concepts of curriculum and instruction 
in their specific discipline and to use a wide variety of strategies for planning, conducting, and 
evaluating units of instruction. The course places emphasis on the materials being used in the 
secondary classrooms and includes classroom management; instructional materials selection; reading 
in the content areas; lesson presentation and critique; and conferencing techniques. This course is 
limited to students who have been admitted to and are in good standing in the credentials program. 
This course is to be taken the semester before the actual student teaching experience and taken 
concurrently with specific methods courses (Education 306-310). Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 306. FIELD EXPERIENCE/METHODS OF TEACHING MATHEMATICS. A study of 
the methods, materials, organization of subject matter, and professional perspective of mathematics 
instruction in the secondary schools. Designed to complement and expand upon the skills developed 
in curriculum and instruction. An extensive clinical field experience is a required part of this course. 
Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing. Corequisite: Education 305. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 307. METHODS OF TEACHING MODERN LANGUAGES. A course designed to 
familiarize students with both theoretical and practical aspects of teaching foreign languages: listening, 
speaking, reading, writing, and culture. Designed to complement and expand upon skills developed in 
curriculum and instruction. Corequisite: Education 305. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EDUC 308. FIELD EXPERIENCE/METHODS OF TEACHING ENGLISH AND 
COMMUNICATION. A study of the methods, materials, organization of subject matter, and 
professional perspective of English and communication instruction in the secondary schools. Designed 
to complement and expand upon the skills developed in curriculum and instruction. An extensive 
clinical field experience is a required part of this course. Corequisite: Education 305. 
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 309. FIELD EXPERIENCE/METHODS OF TEACHING SCIENCE. A study of the 
methods, materials, organization of subject matter, and professional perspective of science instruction 
in the secondary schools. Designed to complement and expand upon skills developed in curriculum 
and instruction. An extensive clinical field experience is a required part of this course. Corequisite: 
Education 305. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
EDUC 310. FIELD EXPERIENCE/METHODS OF TEACHING THE SOCIAL SCIENCES. A 
study of the methods, materials, organization of subject matter, and professional perspective of social 
science instruction in the secondary schools. Designed to complement and expand upon skills 
developed in curriculum and instruction. An extensive clinical field experience is a required part of 
this course. Corequisite: Education 305. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 316. SECONDARY ENGLISH/HISTORY/FOREIGN LANGUAGE CURRICULUM 
AND INSTRUCTION II. This course provides English, History and Foreign Language secondary 
education majors with an advanced implementation of planning and instruction in secondary 
classrooms.  Topics will include literacy in the content area, motivation, management techniques and 
English/history/foreign language-specific teaching strategies.  Topics discussed will be implemented 
through an imbedded field that will require English, History and Foreign Language preservice teachers 



Education / 177 
 

to demonstrate the implementation of topics. Students will also complete an advanced examination of 
Educational professionalism and ethics.  Prerequisite: Education 215.  Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 317. SECONDARY MATH/SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION II. This 
course provides Math and Science secondary education majors with an advanced implementation of 
planning and instruction in secondary classrooms.  Topics will include literacy in the content area, 
motivation, management techniques, and math/science-specific teaching strategies.  Topics discussed 
will be implemented through an imbedded field that will require math and science preservice teachers 
to demonstrate the implementation of topics.  Students will also complete an advanced examination of 
Educational professionalism and ethics. Prerequisite: Education 215.  Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 323. TEACHING PRIMARY AND ELEMENTARY LITERACY. A course designed to 
acquaint future elementary and early childhood teachers with strategies for developing emergent 
literacy in reading and the integrated language arts. Topics include methods to develop print awareness, 
decoding ability, and reading extended text. The course will also explore the developmental continuum 
of language and literacy, including writing, speaking, listening, visualizing and viewing. Direct field 
experience is required in the elementary school where students will utilize assessment techniques, plan 
lessons, and use a variety of approaches and materials in instructing students. Prerequisites: Sophomore 
standing elementary and special education majors, junior elementary education and middle level 
majors, or with special permission from the course instructor and completion of Education 202, 
Psychology 102, and one other methods course. Elementary Education, Middle Level Education, and 
Special Education majors only. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EDUC 324. TEACHING ELEMENTARY SOCIAL SCIENCES. A study of resources and 
methods of teaching PreK-8 social studies including history, geography, civics, and economics. This 
course also emphasizes the development of competencies associated with the use of audio-visual 
equipment and materials. Directed field experience in the elementary and middle schools is required. 
Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 325. TEACHING ELEMENTARY SCIENCE AND HEALTH. A course of instruction in 
methods of teaching PreK-8 science, health, and physical education. Includes classroom development 
of competencies in the planning and use of hands-on materials and application in classroom instruction. 
Directed field experience in the elementary and middle schools is required. Prerequisite: sophomore 
standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 326. TEACHING UPPER ELEMENTARY/MIDDLE LITERACY. A course designed to 
acquaint elementary, early childhood, and English education majors about methods to teach literacy 
(reading and the integrated language arts) to upper elementary and middle school level students. Topics 
include methods to develop vocabulary knowledge, comprehension, expressive writing, and content 
area reading. Direct field experience in elementary or middle schools is required. Prerequisites: Junior 
or senior standing for PreK-4 majors, or special permission from course instructor; elementary majors 
must have completed Education 202, 323, 327; and Psychology 102; English majors must have 
sophomore standing and must have completed Education 202, and Psychology 102. Restricted to 
elementary education, English Secondary Education Certification, and Middle Level majors only.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EDUC 327. TEACHING ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. Elementary mathematics concepts 
and pedagogy will be introduced within the framework of the curriculum and evaluation standards 
recommended by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. Mathematical strands to be 
explored include geometry; measurement; number sense; whole number operations; patterns and 
functions; fraction and decimal operations; graphing; statistics; and probability. A strong emphasis 
will be placed on problem solving as a skill needed to make informed decisions about life. All concepts 
will be taught with a dependence on manipulative activities. The scope of the course goes from early 
childhood to adolescence. A structured field experience is embedded within the course. It is strongly 
recommended that this course be completed before taking additional three-credit elementary methods 
courses. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Semester course, three hours. 
 



178 / Grove City College 

EDUC 328. CHILDREN'S LITERATURE AND LANGUAGE. A survey of children’s literature 
for early childhood, intermediate, and middle grades with an extensive representation of books from 
classic and contemporary authors and illustrators. Major literary genres are studied, story-telling 
techniques are discussed, and issues in literature for children are explored. Additionally, the course 
discusses the linguistic development in children that is fostered through exposure to literature. Open 
to PreK-4 and middle certification majors only. Priority given to PreK-4 majors. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 102. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 329. MIDDLE LEVEL CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION. This course provides 
middle level certification candidates with an in-depth study of middle level education that focuses on 
meeting the needs of adolescent learners. Topics will include the role of collaboration in 
departmentalized middle level programs, adolescent guidance, management of the learning 
environment, and school governance in middle and junior high settings. Prerequisite: Psychology 102.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
  
EDUC 330. LITERATURE AND WRITING FOR THE SECONDARY CLASSROOM. A course 
designed to familiarize the student with both theoretical and practical aspects of teaching literature and 
writing used at the secondary level. Included will be a discussion of literature selection, treatment of 
the material, and writing assessment procedures. Traditional works will be emphasized. Prerequisites: 
Education 202 and Psychology 102. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EDUC 342. EARLY CHILDHOOD CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION. This course provides 
an overview of all curriculum components essential for operating an early childhood classroom with a 
focus on preschool and primary environments. Major curriculum approaches explored and 
implemented in early childhood settings include a traditional structured approach, a thematic approach, 
and the project approach. An awareness of learning styles, diversity, and special needs are integral to 
effective planning. The role of assessment in the curriculum sequence is included. Students are 
required to implement curriculum approaches in selected sites. Sophomore or junior level course. 
Prerequisites: Education 281 and Psychology 102. Semester course, three hours. 

 
EDUC 343. TRENDS AND ISSUES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION. This course 
examines contemporary trends and issues surrounding early childhood education discussing 
sociological, psychological, political, and economic forces shaping contemporary families, children, 
and schooling. Current educational practices, curriculum, and administration of programs are integral 
topics included in this study. Senior level course. Prerequisites: Education 281 or Special Education 
203, and Education 342. Semester course, three hours. 
 
EDUC 350. EDUCATION FOR THE MISSION FIELD. This course seeks to provide students with 
the opportunity to learn more about the philosophy and structure of international, missional, and 
national schools. A strong focus will be provided on how to partner with nationals to advance their 
own teaching abilities. Students will have the opportunity to interact with several alumni who are 
currently teaching on the mission field. The final component of the course will be a service-learning 
project for a mission school.  Alternate years, spring semester only, one hour. 
 
EDUC 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. A course designed to permit students to do advanced study 
or to participate in educational experiences that provide an opportunity for professional and/or 
educational self-improvement. Junior standing, permission of the department chair and a faculty 
sponsor are required. Semester course, one, two or seven hours. 
 
EDUC 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
education. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EDUC 371. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to help pre-service secondary and K-12 teachers observe and collaborate with experienced 
teachers to gain the knowledge and practice necessary to effectively teach in a secondary classroom.  
Key components include actively observing and critically reflecting upon elements of successful 



Education / 179 
 

planning and preparation, classroom environment, instructional delivery, professional conduct, 
assessment, and knowledge of diverse learners. Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology 102.  
 Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 375. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to help pre-service secondary and K-12 teachers actively collaborate with experienced 
teachers to gain the knowledge and practice necessary to effectively teach in a secondary classroom.  
Included in this collaboration is successful planning and preparation that meets the needs of diverse 
learners and is closely tied to assessment practices, the maintenance of an effective learning 
environment through the examination and implementation of successful classroom management 
strategies, the use of effective instructional delivery techniques, the demonstration of professional 
conduct, and the knowledge of professional development opportunities and requirements. Prerequisite: 
Education 215. Suggested concurrent with Education 316 or 317.  Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 381. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to permit students to engage in a thirty to forty-hour entry-level field experience in an 
elementary school. Field experience interns observe experienced teachers in classroom settings noting 
organizational structures, curriculum issues, and students’ development. Diverse educational settings 
are strongly encouraged. Prerequisite: Psychology 102. Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 382. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to permit students to engage in thirty to forty hours of observational and participatory field 
experience in an elementary school. Field experience interns observe teachers in classroom settings 
and assume some level of teaching responsibility. Diverse educational settings are strongly 
recommended. Prerequisite: Education 381. Corequisite: Education 323. Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 383. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to permit students to engage in thirty to forty hours of observational and participatory field 
experience in an elementary school. Field experience interns observe teachers in classroom settings 
and assume some level of teaching responsibility. Diverse educational settings are strongly 
recommended. Prerequisite: Education 382. Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 385. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). This one-credit 
second field experience is an internship course designed to permit students who desire to gain 
additional experience working with young children to engage in a semester-long field experience in 
the Early Education Center. Sophomore or junior level course. Prerequisite: Education 281.  
 Semester course, one hour. 
 
EDUC 386. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). This two-credit 
third field experience is an internship course designed to permit students more in-depth experience in 
studying and teaching young children. Students may choose between Education 385 and 386 for a 
second field experience in early childhood. Sophomore or junior level course. Prerequisites: Education 
281 and 385. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EDUC 387. FIELD EXPERIENCE IN EDUCATION. A field-based course designed to permit 
students to engage in approximately twenty-one hours of field experience that fulfills the requirements 
of a Level I, Level II, or Level III field experience course.  With instructor approval, this course may 
substitute for Education 371, 372, 373, 381, 382, or 383. Prerequisite: Education 202, Education 205, 
or Psychology 102. With instructor permission the course may be taken more than once. 
 Intersession or online term only, one hour. 
 
EDUC 390. STUDIES: SPECIAL TOPICS COURSE. This course is taught by a visiting scholar 
from the field of education. The topic for each course will vary from year to year. The course will 
consist of a minimum of two two-hour lectures on the topic plus a paper of specified length related to 
the topic. Prerequisite: Junior or senior education majors. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



180 / Grove City College 

EDUC 431. STUDENT TEACHING, SECONDARY. Secondary credential candidates (seniors) 
student teach at the junior/middle school and/or high school levels in the public secondary schools five 
days per week for one semester and attend one practicum session per week.  
 Semester course, sixteen hours. 
 
EDUC 432. STUDENT TEACHING, SECONDARY. Secondary credential candidates (seniors) 
student teach at the junior/middle school and/or high school levels in the public secondary schools five 
days per week for one half of a semester and attend one practicum session per week. Departmental 
permission required. One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 
EDUC 441. ELEMENTARY STUDENT TEACHING, PRIMARY GRADES. Senior level 
Elementary Education candidates student teach full time in PreK and elementary public schools for 
seven weeks in a primary classroom (pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, first, second, or third grade) and 
attend one practicum session per week. One-half semester course, eight hours. 

 
EDUC 442. STUDENT TEACHING MIDDLE LEVEL I. Senior level Middle Education 
candidates student teach full-time in an upper elementary/middle public school for seven weeks in a 
classroom serving upper/elementary or early middle school learners (grades 4, 5, 6). In addition to 
student teaching responsibilities, Middle Education candidates also attend one practicum session per 
week. Prerequisites: Senior standing and completion of all methodology courses required for middle 
level certification. One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 
EDUC 443. ELEMENTARY STUDENT TEACHING, INTERMEDIATE GRADES. Senior level 
Elementary Education credential candidates student teach full time in the elementary public schools 
for seven weeks in an intermediate classroom (fourth, fifth, or sixth grade) and attend one practicum 
session per week. One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 
EDUC 444. STUDENT TEACHING MIDDLE LEVEL II. Senior level Middle Education 
candidates student teach full-time in a middle/junior high public school for seven weeks in a classroom 
serving upper/elementary or early middle school learners (grades 6, 7, 8). In addition to student 
teaching responsibilities, Middle Education candidates also attend one practicum session per week. 
Prerequisites include senior level standing and completion of all methodology courses required in 
middle level certification. One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 
EDUC 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. A course designed to permit students to do advanced study 
or to participate in educational experiences that provide an opportunity for professional and/or 
educational self-improvement. Senior standing, permission of the department chair and a faculty 
sponsor are required. Semester course, one, two or seven hours. 
 
EDUC 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
education. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EDUC 480. INTERNSHIP IN EDUCATION. An opportunity for junior or senior level education 
majors to participate in approved experiences that provide extraordinary leadership roles in applying 
educational theory to practice, under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty 
member. Products of the internship include a log, evaluation by the on-site manager, and all other 
requirements established within the faculty approved Contract of Expected Responsibilities and 
Outcomes. Prerequisites: Acceptable standing within the Education Department and permission of the 
Chair or Associate Chair of the Education Department. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Education / 181 
 

EDUC 488. SEMINAR: ISSUES IN EDUCATION/COMPARATIVE EDUCATION. A capstone 
course for senior credential candidates that re-examines the major philosophical, historical, social, 
political, and psychological issues as they impact the teaching profession. Successful educational 
practices from various countries of the world will be studied as the student considers possible solutions 
to the crisis facing American education today. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI), 
Speaking Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirement for all education majors. 
 Semester course, three hours. 

SPECIAL EDUCATION (SEDU) 
SEDU 101. EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS. This course is a foundational study of the characteristics, 
etiology, and psychological and educational needs of individuals eligible for special education 
services, focusing on the implication of such needs on the educator and meeting of individual needs in 
a standards-aligned system. The course also introduces students to the processes, professionals, and 
strategies for identifying individual needs and the establishment and delivery of required special 
education services. An embedded special education field experience is part of this course. 
Prerequisites: Psychology 102 and appropriate clearances. Semester course, three hours. 
 
SEDU 102. EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS FOR 7-12 & K-12. This course is a foundational study 
of the characteristics, etiology, and psychological and educational needs of individuals eligible for 
special education services, focusing on the implication of such needs on the educator and meeting of 
individual needs in a standards-aligned system. The course also briefly introduces pre-service teachers 
to the processes, professionals, and strategies for identifying individual needs and the establishment & 
delivery of required special education services.  A particular focus will be on the implementation of 
identification, implementation, and inclusion in the secondary classroom. Prerequisite: Education 215. 
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
SEDU 103. METHODS OF SECONDARY SPECIAL EDUCATION IMPLEMENTATION. The 
course is an expansion and implementation of previous coursework for K-12, 7-12 and Special 
Education Majors that will focus on co-teaching, full inclusion, assessment writing & modification, 
and co-curricular experiences.  This course will include one-credit of classroom instruction and one 
credit of field experience. Prerequisite: Education 215.  It is acceptable to take Special Education 102 
and 103 concurrently.  Semester course, one hour. 
 
SEDU 202. BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS. Topics include assessment and intervention with 
a focus on ethics and methods to increase and decrease behaviors. Students will carry out behavioral 
analyses and intervention to design and implement individual and group behavior plans for special 
education populations while gaining proficiency in developing pro-social behaviors and in direct 
instruction to explicitly teach appropriate social skills and communication. Furthermore, students will 
implement intervention strategies appropriately in compliance with IEP goals with respect for student 
safety and individual needs. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and appropriate 
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special 
Education 203.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SEDU 203. SPECIAL EDUCATION SYSTEMS AND PROCESSES/FIELD EXPERIENCE 
LEVEL I. This field experience-based course will provide the prospective teacher with opportunities 
to interact and instruct students with Special Education labels as they work with both Regular 
Education and Special Education teachers. Student-interns enrolled in this field will function as skilled 
observers/explorers and pre-student teacher tutors as they collect information and prepare and deliver 
lessons to small groups and individual students while spending at least 35 hours in the field, focusing 
on the special education process, LRE, Participation in a Standards Aligned Curriculum, and 
Behavioral Interventions. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and appropriate 
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special 
Education 202, as assignments from that course will be tied to this field experience. 
  Fall semester only, one hour. 
 



182 / Grove City College 

SEDU 204. EDUCATIONAL ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL EDUCATION. This is an in-depth 
study of the tools and processes used in identification of and programming for the Exceptional 
Population. Expertise will be developed in the implementation of unbiased multiple-layered 
assessment tools and their subsequent application in IEP programming. Students will become 
proficient in providing and evaluating in-depth authentic, benchmark, diagnostic, formative, screening, 
and summative assessment data related to meeting the needs of those being considered for or identified 
within the special education population. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and 
appropriate clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SEDU 205. CONSULTATION, LITIGATION, AND TRANSITION. Students will prepare skills 
for building productive professional interactions with parents, educators, service providers, and 
community professionals. Additionally, historical cases and current litigation will be studied to enable 
students to design and implement programs that provide full procedural safeguards to all constituents 
while gaining expertise in aligning resources, securing providers, and mediating forces to provide for 
the full spectrum of support services both legally and ethically. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special 
Education 101, and clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SEDU 306. SUPPORTIVE SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGY / FIELD EXPERIENCE LEVEL 
II. This field experience-based course will provide the student-intern with opportunities to interact and 
instruct students with Special Education Labels as they work with both Regular Education and Special 
Education teachers. Specifically, this experience will be selected to provide a 25-hour experience with 
students receiving special education services under the labels of moderate to severely handicapped. 
Prerequisites: Psychology 102; Special Education 101, 202, 203, 204, 205; and appropriate clearances 
and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special Education 307, 
as assignments from that course will be tied to this field experience.  Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
SEDU 307. EVIDENCE BASED INSTRUCTION OF LOW INCIDENCE DISABILITIES 
Students will develop advanced skills in meeting the needs of special education students with labels of 
Autistic, Visually Impaired/Blind, Hearing Impaired/Deaf, Multiple Handicapped, Severe Disabilities, 
Orthopedic Impairments, and Traumatic Brain Injury. Students will demonstrate knowledge of 
facilitating inclusion, managing the environment, and the use of available technology to design and 
implement programs, while continuously monitoring progress, providing remediation and 
compensation techniques, and providing alternative routes to achievement across all areas of the 
continuum of services. Prerequisites: Psychology 102; Special Education 101, 202, 203, 204, 205; and 
appropriate clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: 
Special Education 306.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SEDU 308. READING DISABILITIES. This is an advanced level course in literacy methods aimed 
at preparing students to meet the needs of the special education population who experience difficulty 
in literacy development. Students will study research-based findings related to the causes and research-
based strategies on ameliorating such difficulties. Key components of the course focus on the 
appropriate use of materials, assessment instruments, teaching strategies, and a variety of service 
delivery models to optimize the success of individual students. This course also includes an ongoing 
clinical field experience throughout the semester in which students will collaborate with a practicing 
special educator of reading specialist to work with a student with literacy needs. Prerequisites: 
Psychology 102, Special Education 101 or 102, Education 323; and appropriate clearances and 
standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SEDU 309. EVIDENCE BASED INSTRUCTION OF HIGH INCIDENCE DISABILITIES. 
Students will develop advanced skills in meeting the needs of special education students with labels of 
Learning Disabled, Speech and Language Impaired, Mentally Retarded/Cognitively Impaired, 
Seriously Emotionally Disturbed, and Attention Deficit Disorder (Other Health Impaired). Students 
will demonstrate knowledge of facilitating inclusion, managing the environment, and the use of 
available technology to design and implement programs. As appropriate, students will provide 
integrated learning experiences, multiple instructional approaches, and evidence-based decisions. 



Education / 183 
 

Prerequisites: Psychology 102; Special Education 306, 307; Education 323, 326; and appropriate 
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special 
Education 310.  Spring semester only, three credits. 
 
SEDU 310. EFFECTIVE PRACTICES AND DELIVERY/ FIELD EXPERIENCE LEVEL III. 
This field experience-based course will provide students with opportunities to interact and instruct 
students with Special Education Labels as they work with both Regular Education and Special 
Education teachers. Specifically, this 25-hour experience will be selected to provide experience with 
Special Education students with labels considered as High Incidence Disabilities. Prerequisites: 
Psychology 102; Special Education 306, 307; Education 323, 326; and appropriate clearances and 
standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special Education 309. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
SEDU 411. SPECIAL EDUCATION STUDENT TEACHING. Student teaching is a capstone 
rigorous experience that provides the opportunity to practice and demonstrate the practices of a 
competent Special Education teacher under the supervision of a certified Special Educator. At the 
completion of the student teaching experiences, student teachers are expected to demonstrate mastery 
in implementing the competencies that have been developed from coursework. Student teachers who 
achieve the necessary competencies will be recommended for special education certification. Issuance 
of certification will hinge on the completion of all graduation and certification requirements, including 
student teaching, and must be initiated by the teaching candidate through the office of the College 
Certifying Officer. Pre-requisites: All special education coursework (other than SEDU 412) must be 
successfully completed and the teacher candidate must have the approval of the Department Chair. 
Other prerequisites include appropriate clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove 
City College. Corequisites: Special Education 412 and Education 441. Students will spend one half of 
the semester in the special education student teaching assignment and one half of the semester 
completing PreK-4 student teaching.  Semester course, eight hours. 
 
SEDU 412. PRACTICUM OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT. As an extension of the 
student teaching experience, student teachers will participate in a practicum experience including 
course work, assignments, and interaction with the college supervisor while exploring topics that are 
important to the development of the Professional Special Educator. Thus, the course will support the 
student teacher in applying theory to practice during the student teaching experience. Additionally, 
topics of professional responsibilities, confidentiality issues, and current issues in special education 
will be discussed. Corequisite: Special Education 411. Semester course, one hour. 
 
SEDU 413. SPECIAL EDUCATION STUDENT TEACHING II. Continuation of the capstone 
Special Education student teaching experience. Prerequisites: Special Education 411. 
  Semester course, eight hours. 
 

INTEGRATIVE SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY ENGINEERING 
AND MATHEMATICS K-12 ENDORSEMENT PROGRAM 

(INTEGRATIVE STEM ENDORSEMENT) 
 
EDUC 410 (Undergraduate) / 510 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR EARLY 
CHILDHOOD AND ELEMENTARY SCHOOL. This course focuses on STEM topics, methods, 
curriculum and instruction for school students in early childhood grades PreK-4 and elementary school 
settings.  In this course, students will (a) Gain exposure to the standards knowledge of standards that 
are pivotal in the STEM field, (b)  Explore how STEM can be involved in other disciplines and used 
in cross curricular activities and lessons, and (c ) Explore inquiry-based teaching and learning 
methodologies to teach STEM topics - explore each topic (science, technology, engineering, and math) 
individually and explore methodologies that work within each topic area. In addition, students will 
participate in a field component where they will design, implement, and reflect using the reflective 
teaching model on lessons and units that incorporate an integrative STEM learning cycle approach and 
developmentally appropriate methodology for PREK-4 students. This course is in partial fulfillment 
of the STEM endorsement from PDE.  Semester course, online only, three hours. 



184 / Grove City College 

EDUC 411 (Undergraduate) / 511 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR 
ADOLESCENT AND MIDDLE SCHOOL. This course focuses on STEM topics, methods, 
curriculum and instruction for school students in grades 4-8.  The course is designed for candidates 
seeking an endorsement in Integrative Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 
Education.  In this course, students will (a) Apply knowledge of standards that are pivotal in the STEM 
field, (b) Create cross curricular lessons, and (c) Apply inquiry-based teaching and learning 
methodologies to teach STEM topics. In addition, students will participate in a field component where 
they will design, implement, and reflect using the reflective teaching model on lessons and units that 
incorporate an integrative STEM learning cycle approach and developmentally appropriate 
methodology for 4-8 students.  Prerequisite: EDUC 510. This course is in partial fulfillment of the 
STEM endorsement from Pennsylvania Department of Education. Semester course, online only, three 
hours. 
 
EDUC 412 (Undergraduate) / 512 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR 
SECONDARY AND HIGH SCHOOL. This course focuses on STEM topics, methods, curriculum 
and instruction for school students in secondary settings, grades 9-12.  In this course, students will (a) 
utilize their knowledge of the standards to create and implement lesson plans in the field, (b) Explore 
hot topics in STEM education such as robotics and 3D printing (c) Gain hands on experience with 
technology tools related to STEM education. In addition, students will participate in a field component 
where they will design, implement, and reflect using the reflective teaching model on lessons and units 
that incorporate an integrative STEM learning cycle approach and developmentally appropriate 
methodology for 9-12 students.  Prerequisite:  EDUC 511. This course is in partial fulfillment of the 
STEM endorsement from Pennsylvania Department of Education.   
 Semester course, online only, three hours. 
 
EDUC 413 (Undergraduate) / 513 (Post-baccalaureate). STEM PRACTICUM AND APPLIED 
LEADERSHIP.  A capstone course designed to integrate previously learned concepts in other STEM 
endorsement classes through a long-range service project and teaching experience in a PreK-12 
setting.   The course is designed to develop the ability to endorsement candidates to integrate 
previously learned content and dispositions to have a dynamic impact on schools and the field of 
education.  Critical course components include engagement with STEM community partners from 
business and industry outside of the PreK-12 settings, developing recourses for the PreK-12 setting, 
and furthering the promotion of STEM teaching and learning as an instructional leader.   The course 
covers broad themes:  STEM in Society and Professions, STEM Education, and STEM Educational 
Leadership.   The capstone course will be structured with a weekly practicum meeting for the total 
cohort, but the individual students will each be partnered with a STEM cooperating educator or 
cooperating school administrator AND a mentor professor from institution.  The STEM capstone class 
is a rigorous internship for the educator in a high school, middle school, intermediate, primary, and/or 
early childhood classroom.  All placements must be approved by the course instructor. This course is 
in partial fulfillment of the STEM endorsement from PDE.  Semester course, online only, three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER 
ENGINEERING 
Dr. M. W. Bright, Chair; Dr. Brooks, Dr. Christman, Dr. Mohr, Dr. Rumbaugh. 
 

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Mission Statement, 
Objectives, and Outcomes 

 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) is the analysis, design, and application of 
devices and systems for conversion, processing, and transmission of electrical energy and 
information. Electrical and Computer Engineering at Grove City College now covers such 
basic topics as electric circuits, electronics, electrical machines, signal analysis, and digital 
systems; as well as advanced topics in communication systems, computer systems, and 
control systems. Electrical and computer engineers practice in a variety of professional 
duties including research, design and development, management, sales, field service, 
testing, manufacturing, and education. 



Electrical and Computer Engineering / 185 
 

 The Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at Grove City College offers a 
program leading to the Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering (BSEE) degree. The 
electrical engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission 
of ABET, http://www.abet.org. 
 Proficiency in writing and speaking skills is essential to a productive career in any 
branch of Electrical and Computer Engineering. To that end, all majors take Electrical 
Engineering 401 (Electrical/Computer Engineering Design), as a Writing Intensive (WI) 
and Speaking Intensive (SI) course. In addition, all graduates need to know how to obtain, 
evaluate, and use technical information related to the field of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering. Instruction and practice in these Information Literacy (IL) skills is provided in 
the combination of the following required courses: Electrical Engineering 202, 251, and 
351. 

Electrical Engineering Program Educational Objectives 
1. Graduates will be active in the electrical engineering profession or an alternative 

field consistent with their God-given calling. Many of our graduates will assume 
leadership roles as a result of having demonstrated strong technical abilities as 
well as communication and team skills. 

2. Graduates will set career goals and engage in life-long learning through self-study, 
continuing education courses, and/or formal graduate education in order to reach 
those goals. 

3. Graduates will demonstrate ethical behavior in the workplace and will carry out 
their professional duties in a manner that is consistent with a Christian life 
perspective. 

Student Outcomes 
 To ensure fulfillment of the ECE Department objectives, graduates of the EE program 
shall demonstrate: 

1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics. 

2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors. 

3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 

situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts. 

5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives. 

6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions. 

7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 

 
 Inherent in the ECE curriculum at Grove City College is the inculcation of design 
experience. Engineering design is the process of devising a system, component, or process 
to meet desired needs. It is a decision-making process applying basic science, mathematics, 
and engineering science to use available resources to optimally meet stated objectives. In 
the EE program, engineering design is assured via design problems and projects integrated 
throughout the ECE curriculum. 



186 / Grove City College 

 Freshman Year-The Introduction to Engineering (ENGR 156) course introduces the 
profession of engineering and the design process. Students work in teams on a design project 
and present results in written and oral reports. 
 Sophomore and Junior Years-ECE students are afforded additional opportunities to 
solve relevant design problems through homework and group design projects in various 
courses in the sophomore and junior years. Design projects that incorporate course-specific 
topics along with techniques introduced in the freshman Introduction to Engineering course 
are assigned in Digital Logic Design (ELEE 204), Electric Machines (ELEE 303), and 
Microcontrollers with Robotic Applications (ELEE 310), and other courses as appropriate. 
These projects are presented in written and/or oral reports. 
 Senior Year-The integrated design experience in ECE at Grove City College 
culminates in the senior year with the capstone design project. The capstone design 
experience comprises a combination of research and proposal writing in 
Electrical/Computer Engineering Design (ELEE 401) and Capstone Design Project I 
(ELEE or ROBO 451) in the fall semester of the senior year and hands-on implementation 
and documentation of that design in Capstone Design Project II (ELEE or ROBO 452) in 
the spring semester. The project must incorporate one or more advanced topics chosen from 
the senior-level stem sequences in Communication Systems, Computer Systems, or Control 
Systems (students choosing the CE concentration must include the Computer Systems 
sequence). Since stem courses build on fundamentals presented in previous ECE courses, 
the capstone project assures that all ECE graduates complete a major design experience 
drawing on fundamental concepts as well as advanced ECE topics. While seniors are asked 
to present various oral and written updates throughout the capstone experience, the climax 
comes in the second semester of the senior year when students present oral and written 
reports to the public, including engineering professionals from nearby industries. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering—99-
100 hours 

Electrical Engineering/Computer Core (28 hours) 
Computer Science 141; Electrical Engineering 201, 204, 251, 252, 301, 304, 321, 
351, 401; Electrical Engineering or Robotics 451 and 452. 

Engineering Core (7 hours) 
Engineering 156, 301, 402, and Mechanical Engineering 120. 

Math/Science Core (30-31 hours) 
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262; Engineering 274 or 
Mathematics 214; and Physics 101 and 102. 

Concentration Area—choose one: 
 Electrical Engineering Concentration (EEEE)—(34 hours): 

• Electrical Engineering 202, 302, 303, and 352 (10 hours). 
• Math/science elective (3-4 hours): Choose one course from the following: 

Astronomy 206, 207; Biology 101, 102; Chemistry 227, 241, 345; Mathematics 
210, 213, 222, 331; Physics 234, or 402. 

• Technical electives* (15 hours): Select 15 hours from any 200-400 level 
Electrical Engineering, Engineering, Robotics, Mechanical Engineering, or 
Computer Science course, excluding Electrical Engineering 210 and Computer 
Science 205. 

• Advanced electives* (6 hours): Select six hours from Electrical Engineering 404, 
432, 442, or Engineering 412. 

 Computer Engineering Concentration (EECE)—(33 hours): 
• Electrical Engineering 310, 441, 442; Computer Science 220, 222, 340 (18 hours) 



Electrical and Computer Engineering / 187 
 

• Math/science elective (3 hours): Choose one course from the following: 
Astronomy 206, 207; Biology 102; Chemistry 227, 241, 345; Mathematics 210, 
213, 222, 331; Physics 234, or 402. 

• Technical electives* (9 hours): Select 9 hours from any 200-400 level Electrical 
Engineering, Engineering, Robotics, Mechanical Engineering, or Computer 
Science course, excluding Electrical Engineering 210 and Computer Science 
205. 

• Advanced elective* (3 hours): Select one of Electrical Engineering 404, 432, or 
Engineering 412. 

*No course can be used to satisfy both the technical and advanced elective 
requirements. 

 
Courses that count in the Electrical Engineering major quality point average (MQPA):  
 All courses with “ELEE” and “ROBO” prefix; ENGR 390; COMP 141, 220, 222, 340, 
and 450. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 

 
FOUR-YEAR PLAN for ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING CONCENTRATION 

 1st   2nd                                            1st 2nd 
FRESHMAN YEAR Sem.  Sem.    SOPHOMORE YEAR                 Sem. Sem. 
Mathematics 161-162 4 4 Mathematics 261-262 4 3 
Physics 101 - 4 Physics 102  4 - 
Humanities 102 - Writing 101 3 3 Electrical Engineering 201-202 3 3 
Physical Education 100 - 1 Electrical Engineering 204 - 3 
Computer Science 141 - 3 Electrical Engineering 251-252 1 1 
Engineering 156 2 - Electrical Engineering 321 - 3 
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101 4 - Math/Science Elective  - 3 
Mechanical Engineering 120   3   - Humanities 200   3  -  
 16 15 SSFT course                                        2        - 

                        17     16 
JUNIOR YEAR   SENIOR YEAR 
Electrical Engineering 301-302 3 3 Electrical Engineering 401 3 - 
Electrical Engineering 303-304 3 3 Electrical Engineering 451-452 1 3 
Electrical Engineering 351-352 1 1 Engineering 402  - 1 
Engineering 301 1 - Technical Electives 6 3 
Technical Electives 3 3 Advanced Electives - 6 
Math 214 or Engineering 274 - 3 Humanities 303  - 3 
Social Science course 3 - Free Electives                                     5        - 
Humanities 301-202    3  3      15 16 
 17 16 

 
FOUR-YEAR PLAN for COMPUTER ENGINEERING CONCENTRATION 

 1st   2nd                                            1st   2nd 
FRESHMAN YEAR Sem.  Sem. SOPHOMORE YEAR               Sem. Sem. 
Mathematics 161-162 4 4 Mathematics 261-262 4 3 
Physics 101 - 4 Physics 102  4 - 
Humanities 102 - Writing 101 3 3 Electrical Engineering 201 3 - 
Physical Education 100 - 1 Electrical Engineering 204 - 3 
Computer Science 141 - 3 Electrical Engineering 251-252 1 1 
Engineering 156 2 - Electrical Engineering 321 - 3 
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101 4 - Computer Science 220-222 3 3 
Mechanical Engineering 120                3      -  Humanities 200  - 3 
    16 15 SSFT course                                        2        - 
           17 16 



188 / Grove City College 

JUNIOR YEAR   SENIOR YEAR 
Electrical Engineering 301-304 3 3 Electrical Engineering 401 3 - 
Electrical Engineering 310 - 3 Electrical Engineering 441-442 3 3 
Electrical Engineering 351 1 - Electrical Engineering 451-452 1 3 
Engineering 301 1 - Engineering 402  - 1 
Technical Elective 3 - Technical Electives 3 3 
Social Science - Mathematics 214 3 3 Advanced Elective - 3 
Math/Science Elective 3 - Humanities 303  - 3 
Computer Science 340 - 3 Free Electives    6  - 
Humanities 301-202                             3      3                                               16 16 
 17 15 

Course Requirements for a minor in Robotics (19-20 hours) 
  A minor in Robotics will consist of Robotics 301, 302; Engineering 301; a 3-4 credit 
robotics-related capstone project; and nine hours from Computer Science 445, Electrical 
Engineering 310, Engineering 411, Engineering 412, Mechanical Engineering 316, or 
Mechanical Engineering 410 or Engineering 390 Introduction to Mechatronics. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ENGINEERING CORE COURSES (ENGR) 
ENGR 156. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING. Introduces students to the engineering 
profession and the design process. Course lectures and assignments include the design process; 
problem definition and solution; oral and written communications; group dynamics; public 
responsibility; current global engineering challenges; and engineering ethics. A group design project 
is required. For mechanical engineering students, this course is taken concurrently with Mechanical 
Engineering 120. Semester course, two hours. 
 
ENGR 274. MATHEMATICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING. A course for engineering and 
science majors covering selected topics in probability and statistics, linear algebra, discrete 
mathematics, and numerical methods as applied to the solution of problems in engineering and science. 
Students who receive credit for Mathematics 213, 222, and 331 may not receive credit for Engineering 
274. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGR 301. ETHICS IN ENGINEERING AND ROBOTICS. This course investigates ethical 
decision-making from a Christian perspective as it applies to engineering and robotics. It includes an 
overview of approaches to ethical decision-making, as well as particular issues raised by the robotics 
field, such as robots making military decisions, privacy issues with in-home robots, issues with 
emotional bonds, etc. Semester course, one hour. 
 
ENGR 390. SPECIAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in the areas of new engineering 
development based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject matter varies each 
semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of registration.  
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
ENGR 402. ENGINEERING ECONOMY. Principles and methods for analyzing the economic 
feasibility of engineering projects including interest, depreciation, rate-of-return, economic life, 
replacement costs, and comparison of alternative designs. Aspects of this course will be involved in 
the final phase of Senior Capstone projects. Prerequisite: Mathematics 141 or 161; junior or senior 
standing.  Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
ENGR 411. CONTROL SYSTEMS. A study of the design and analysis of feedback control systems 
using classical techniques. Topics include modeling of mechanical and electrical dynamic systems, a 
review of Laplace transform techniques, steady-state error, transient response, stability, root locus 



Electrical and Computer Engineering / 189 
 

design methods, Bode analysis/stability margins, and Bode compensator design. Includes 
MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 210 or 
201; Mechanical Engineering 316 or Electrical Engineering 321; and Engineering 274, Mathematics 
214, or Mathematics 222.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGR 412. MODERN CONTROL THEORY. Analysis and design of feedback control systems 
using modern control modeling and design techniques. Topics include state space modeling of 
mechanical and electrical systems, design of state-space controllers and observers, Kalman filtering, 
and an introduction to advanced topics such as robust control, optimal control (LGR/LQG), and others. 
Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Engineering 411. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING. An opportunity for junior or senior engineering 
majors to participate in an extended work experience (six months or more) under the supervision of an 
on-site manager and a department faculty member. Products of the internship will include an evaluation 
by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship experience, and a paper describing the experience 
and relating it to academic theory. This course may be repeated a maximum of three times. Prerequisite: 
Permission from the department chair. Semester course, one hour. 

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (ELEE) 
ELEE 201. LINEAR CIRCUITS I. An introduction to the analysis and design of electrical circuits 
composed of linear elements. The course begins with time domain analysis of the steady state and 
transient behavior of linear circuits and progresses to sinusoidal steady state analysis using the phasor 
method. Computers are introduced as an aid to analysis and design of circuits via the use of circuit 
simulation software. Prerequisites: Mathematics 162. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 251. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 202. LINEAR CIRCUITS II. Continued study in techniques for analyzing and designing 
circuits composed of linear elements, including the Laplace Transform, convolution, and Fourier 
analysis methods. Applications of linear circuits to electric power systems and frequency selective 
systems are examined. Computers are used as an aid to analysis and design via the use of circuit 
simulation software. Electrical Engineering 202 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the 
Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the Electrical and Computer Engineering curriculum. 
Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 201. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 204. DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN. An introduction to digital circuit analysis and design 
methods. Combinational circuit topics include the use of Boolean algebra, map minimization methods, 
and circuit implementation with logic gates and standard integrated circuits. Sequential circuit design 
is explored, and implementation with flip-flops and standard integrated circuits is investigated. 
Programmable logic implementation of both combinational and sequential circuits is introduced. A 
group design project is required. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 252.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 210. ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. A survey for non-electrical engineering majors 
covering the basic principles of circuit analysis, electronics, instrumentation, and electromechanical 
energy conversion, with computer applications. Prerequisites: Mathematics 162, Physics 102, and 
Mechanical Engineering 120 or Computer Science 141. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 251. LINEAR CIRCUITS LABORATORY. A laboratory course intended to acquaint the 
student with basic techniques of instrumentation, measurement, design, and troubleshooting for linear 
analog circuits. Laboratory investigation of basic Electrical Engineering concepts is integrated with 
design and implementation of practical circuits to meet specifications. Electrical Engineering 251 is 
designed to fulfill the requirements for the Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the Electrical and 
Computer Engineering curriculum. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 201.  
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 



190 / Grove City College 

ELEE 252. DIGITAL CIRCUITS LABORATORY. A laboratory course intended to acquaint the 
student with hardware and software tools used for the design and implementation of digital circuits. A 
variety of digital design techniques are investigated, including gate-level circuits, programmable 
FPGA devices, and hardware definition languages (VHDL). CAD software, a hardware target system, 
and lab equipment are used to design, simulate, program, and verify the operation of digital circuits. 
Computers are used to design and simulate circuits and to program digital devices to implement those 
designs. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 204. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
ELEE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical 
engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. One, two or three hours. 
 
ELEE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
electrical engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor 
are required. One, two or three hours. 
 
ELEE 301. ELECTRONICS I. A study of semiconductor device characteristics, diodes, bipolar 
junction transistors (BJTs), field-effect transistors (FETs), BJT and FET amplifier circuits, bias 
stability, and DC power supplies. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 201 and Mathematics 262. 
Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 351. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 302. ELECTRONICS II. A study of the frequency response characteristics of transistor 
amplifiers, integrated-circuit operational amplifiers, fundamentals of feedback and stability, 
oscillators, active filters, quasi-linear circuits, pulsed waveforms and timing circuits. Prerequisite: 
Electrical Engineering 301. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 352.  

Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 303. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. Theories of transformers, DC machines, induction motors, 
synchronous motors and generators, stepping motors, and single-phase motors are developed, and 
applications are explored. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 202. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 304. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY. Fundamentals of electromagnetic theory, including 
static electric fields; dielectrics; energy and forces in the electric field; magnetic fields in free space 
and in magnetic materials; time-varying fields; and Maxwell's equations with applications. Computer 
techniques are used to solve a problem involving Laplace's Equation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 262.
 Three hours. 
 
ELEE 306. DESIGN OF DIGITAL SYSTEMS. A study of semiconductor devices and their use in 
digital integrated circuits. Characteristics of semiconductor devices will be explored followed by an 
investigation of their application to the design of digital logic circuits and systems. Prerequisite: 
Electrical Engineering 204. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 310. MICROCONTROLLERS WITH ROBOTIC APPLICATIONS. An introduction to 
the skills required to design and program systems that incorporate embedded microprocessors or 
microcontrollers. Topics include microprocessor circuitry and architecture, programming using 
assembly and higher-level languages, and interfacing the microprocessor with external devices. Three 
lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 201 or 210, and Electrical 
Engineering 204. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 321. SIGNAL ANALYSIS. The mathematical representation of continuous and discrete 
systems including Fourier Series and transforms; Laplace transforms; z-transforms; continuous and 
discrete convolution; and digital computer techniques such as FFT's and digital filtering. Prerequisite: 
Electrical Engineering 201. Corequisite: Mathematics 262. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 351. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY I. A hands-on experience in the use of electronic 
devices including discrete active and passive components and sub-assemblies; test equipment; and 
instrumentation. Assignments are oriented toward the analysis and design of analog electronic circuits 



Electrical and Computer Engineering / 191 
 

and systems. Computer software is used for circuit simulation and analysis. Familiarization with the 
technical resources available in the library is also provided. Electrical Engineering 351 is designed to 
fulfill the requirements for the Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the Electrical and Computer 
Engineering curriculum. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 301. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ELEE 352. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY II. A hands-on experience in the use of electronic 
and electrical devices including transformers, motors, and generators as well as discrete active and 
passive components, test equipment, and instrumentation. Assignments are oriented toward the 
analysis and design of analog electronic circuits, networks, and electrical machines. Computer software 
is used for circuit simulation and analysis. Corequisites: Electrical Engineering 302. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
ELEE 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical 
engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
ELEE 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
electrical engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. One, two or three hours. 
 
ELEE 390. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. Special topics, based on 
student demand and faculty interest, in the areas of new electrical engineering development. Specific 
subject matter varies each semester. Prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of 
registration. One, two, three, or four hours.  
 
ELEE 401. ELECTRICAL/COMPUTER ENGINEERING DESIGN. A study of the principles 
and methods of designing electrical/computer engineering systems in today's society. The early stages 
of the design process are emphasized, including identifying needs, requirements specification, 
planning and evaluating design alternatives. Engineering ethics, including intellectual property, are a 
significant focus. The senior design project is initiated, defined and documented. Extensive technical 
writing and oral presentation skills are employed. Electrical Engineering 401 is designed to fulfill the 
requirements for the Writing Intensive (WI) and the Speaking Intensive (SI) instruction in the 
Electrical and Computer Engineering curriculum. Prerequisite: Senior standing in electrical 
engineering (either electrical or computer concentration). Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 404. ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY TRANSMISSION. The analysis of the 
transmission of electromagnetic energy including radiation in free space and in various media, guided 
waves in transmission lines, and antennas. Each student completes an antenna design project as part of 
this course. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 304. Three hours. 
 
ELEE 431. COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS I. Analysis and design of digital and analog 
communication systems. An investigation of the techniques for improving system performance in 
transmitting voice, video, and data, over both noisy wired and wireless channels. A variety of 
techniques are investigated, including modulation, channel coding, equalization, and 
detection. Students are required to simulate the design using MATLAB. Matlab/Simulink simulations. 
Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 321. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 432. COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS II. An advanced study of the communication systems 
applications. Applications include satellite, cellular, digital television & radio, fiber-optic, and wired 
& wireless data networks. System performance will be investigated using the link budget. Selected 
topics in leading-edge technologies are explored such as software-defined radio and software 
communication architecture. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 431.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 441. COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE. An advanced study of Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
organization and architecture. The Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) and Instruction Level Parallelism 
(ILP) are emphasized. The organization and importance of the memory hierarchy, particularly cache 



192 / Grove City College 

memory, are introduced. Modern CPU architectures, such as the Intel IA-32 architecture, are used as 
practical examples of theoretical concepts. A design project is required. Prerequisite: Electrical 
Engineering 204.  Three hours. 
 
ELEE 442. PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE. An advanced study of multiprocessor 
architectures. Different approaches to memory, interconnection network and CPU design are explored. 
The nature and limitations of massively parallel applications are explored. Design of large-scale 
storage systems is introduced. Selected topics in leading-edge computer system design are explored, 
such as quantum computing or wireless sensor networks. Students are required to research selected 
topics in the academic literature. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 441.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT I. An advanced lab course where students learn 
techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project. Written reports and 
oral presentations are required. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering or permission of the 
instructor. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ELEE 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT II. An advanced lab course requiring student teams 
to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations are required. Electrical 
Engineering is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive (SI) instruction in the 
Electrical and Computer Engineering curriculum. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering and one 
of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, or Robotics 451.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ELEE 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical 
engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 One, two or three hours. 
 
ELEE 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
electrical engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. One, two or three hours. 

ROBOTICS (ROBO) 
ROBO 101. INTRO TO ROBOTICS. A hands-on introduction to the science and engineering 
involved in mobile robots.  Fundamentals of robot hardware and software are explored and reinforced 
with weekly hands-on projects culminating in a final project competition.  Prerequisites: Freshman 
standing; Algebra I course in high school. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ROBO 301. INDUSTRIAL ROBOTICS. Presents the fundamentals of robot mechanisms, 
kinematics, dynamics, and controls. Topics include forward and inverse kinematics, differential 
motion and velocities, dynamics and force control, path and trajectory planning, actuators and drive 
systems, and sensors used in robotic systems. The basics of robotic control systems are briefly 
presented. The use of vision systems in robotics is introduced. Two lectures and one lab per week. 
Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 321 or Mechanical Engineering 316, robotics minor, or permission 
of instructor.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ROBO 302. MOBILE ROBOTS. An introduction to the basic principles of mobile robots, including 
mechanical, sensory, and cognitive systems necessary for successful operation. Topics will include 
hardware, locomotion, sensors, control schemes, localization, and navigation. Hands-on lab 
experiences with real robots and a final project supplement lecture material. Two lectures and one lab 
per week. Prerequisites: Physics 101; Mathematics 261; and Engineering 274 or Mathematics 214.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ROBO 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT I. An advanced lab course where students learn 
techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project. Written reports and 



Electrical and Computer Engineering / 193 
 

oral presentations are required. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering or permission of the 
instructor. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ROBO 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT II. An advanced lab course requiring student teams 
to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations are required. Robotics 
452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the Speaking Intensive (SI) course in the Electrical and 
Computer Engineering or Mechanical Engineering major. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering 
and one of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, or Robotics 451.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 
Dr. Mayo, Chair; Dr. Bilbro, Mrs. Craig, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Loretto, Dr. Messer, Dr. E. 
Potter, Dr. Rawl, Dr. Waha. Adjunct: Dr. Barbour. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mrs. 
Philson. 
 
 The Department of English sets high standards for its students in the development of 
composition and research skills necessary for writing clear, well-supported research papers 
in MLA format for each literature course in the program. To this end, all freshman English 
majors take English 201: English Literature Survey and Literary Studies I as the 
foundational Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) course in the major. Oral 
communication skills are essential to success in graduate school as well as in careers related 
to English, and English 351 or 352: Shakespeare serves as the required Speaking Intensive 
(SI) course in the department. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English—39 hours 
 English Core Requirements (24 hours): 

English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; and English 351 or 
352. 

 English Period Electives (6 hours): 
Choose six hours from English 304, 306, 308, 312, 314, 318, 320, or 325. Note: only 
one of ENGL 320 or 325 can be counted toward these six hours. 

 English Genre/Tradition Electives (9 hours): 
Choose nine hours from English 221, 222, 224, 226, 242, 243, 245, 246, 252, 254, 
261, 262, 324, 327, or 356. 

  
Courses that count in the English major quality point average (MQPA): 

All courses with “ENGL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English and Secondary 
Education Certification—85 hours 
 Core Requirements (30 hours): 

English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 402, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; English 351 or 
352; and Writing 271 or 281. 

 English Electives (6 hours): 
Choose two additional ENGL prefix courses; at least one of which must be 300-level 
or higher.  

 Education Requirements (49 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 326, 330, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; 
Special Education 102, 103; and Communication Arts 104. *Note: Students who 
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

 



194 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English and Communication 
Secondary Education Certification—91 hours 
 Core Requirements (30 hours): 

English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 402, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; English 351 or 
352; and Writing 271 or 281. 

 English Electives (6 hours): 
Choose two additional ENGL prefix courses; at least one of which must be 300-level 
or higher.  

 Education Requirements (49 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 326, 330, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; 
Special Education 102, 103; and Communication Arts 104. *Note: Students who 
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

 Communication Core (6 hours): 
 Choose six (6) hours from any one of the following three areas: 

Speech: Communication Arts 109 (one credit course must be taken three times), 
207, 303; Theatre 251 or 255. 

 Media: Communication Arts 110, 135, 222, 235, or 378. 
 Theatre*: Theatre 251, 259 (one credit course must be taken three times), 261, 

262, 320; or English 252.  
 *Students who elect the “Theatre” option must take English 250 as one of their 

English elective courses. 
  
 Note: Advanced Placement credits in English do not count toward the requirements for 
majors within the English Department. They will, however, count as general elective credits 
toward graduation. 

SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES 
 The Department of English offers students significant co-curricular activities 
including: 

• A highly acclaimed theatre program, including two main stage productions and 
numerous student productions during the academic year. 

• Lambda Iota Tau (LIT), the literary honor society on campus, sponsors special 
speakers and poetry readings. 

• Tau Alpha Pi (TAP), the theatre honorary, sponsors a One-Act Play Festival each 
semester. 

• Involvement with the campus newspaper (The Collegian), radio station (WSAJ), 
literary magazines (The Echo and The Quad), yearbook (The Bridge), or the 
College’s public relations offices. 

• Internships, whereby students earn academic credit for work done in conjunction 
with a professional organization related to English. See the course description for 
English 480. 

 
Course Requirements for a minor in Creative Writing (21 hours) 
 A minor in Creative Writing will consist of Writing 315 or an approved Writing 390 
course; Writing 305 or 310; four courses from Writing 271, 272, 281, 320, 359, 382, 383, 
or 384; and one genre literature course from English 230, 242, 243, 245, 246, 250, 252, 261, 
or 262. 
 
 
 



English / 195 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in English (18 hours) 
 A minor in English will consist of any six three-credit ENGL literature courses. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Musical Theatre (21 hours) 
 A minor in Musical Theatre will consist of Music 103, 105, 161 or 162 (minimum 3 
credits); Music 222, Music or Theatre 210, Theatre 251, and six additional hours choosing 
from Music 161, 162, 222, Physical Education 211, 213, 290 Jazz & Tap, Theatre 262, 320, 
and 351. Note: All prospective Musical Theatre minors must pass an audition before being 
admitted into the Musical Theatre minor program. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Theatre (24 hours) 
 This minor is open to all students with a love for theatre and an interest in 
supplementing their academic major with a program that will develop appreciation of 
dramatic literature and skills in the various arts and crafts of the theatre. Twenty-four hours 
are required, including: 
 Theatre Core (12 hours): 

English 250; Theatre 251, 261, and 259 (taken three times). 
Elective options (12 hours) Choose twelve hours from the following: 

English 252, 302, 351, or 352; Theatre 255, 262, 320, 351, or 384. English or Theatre 
260, 290, 360, 390, 460, or 480 courses may also count as elective options but must 
be pre-approved by the department chair and must relate directly to theatre studies. 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in Writing (21 hours) 
 A minor in Writing will consist of Writing 305* or 310; Writing 315; one 300-level 
Writing course (excluding 305 and 310) or a Writing or Communication Arts internship; 
and twelve hours choosing from two writing track options: 

1. Professional Writing Track: Four courses from Communication Arts 135, 235, 
300, 378, Writing 271 or 281, and Entrepreneurship or Marketing 328. 

2. Technical Writing Track: Three courses from Design 101, 210, and 
Communication Arts 378; and one course from Computer Science 141, 155, 205, 
and Electrical Engineering 204. *Note: Writing 305 must be completed by 
students pursuing the Technical Writing Track. 

 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Business Writing (15 hours) 
 A concentration in Business Writing will consist of Writing 310, 315, 320; 
Entrepreneurship or Marketing 328; and one course to be selected from Accounting 303, 
Entrepreneurship or Management 303, Entrepreneurship 467, Marketing 204, 315, and 
Management 214. 
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Creative Writing (15 hours) 
 A concentration in Creative Writing will consist of Writing 271, 315, 320; and two 
courses to be selected from Writing 281, 382, 383, 384, and Communication Arts 359. 
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Professional Writing (15 hours) 
 A concentration in Professional Writing will consist of Writing 305 or 310; Writing 
315, 320; and one course from Communication Arts 135, 235, 300, and Entrepreneurship 
or Marketing 328. 
 
 
 



196 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for a concentration in Science Writing and Reporting (16-17 
hours) 
 A concentration in Science Writing and Reporting will consist of Writing 305, 315; 
Writing 320 or Communication Arts 135 or 235; and two courses to be selected from 
Biology 101, 102, Chemistry 105, 111 and 112, 113, 114, Computer Science 155, Physics 
101, 102, 121, 122, and Psychology 204. 
 
Course Requirements for a concentration in Technical Writing (15-16 hours) 
 A concentration in Technical Writing will consist of Writing 305, 315; Design 101, 
210; and one course to be selected from Astronomy 206, 207, Biology 101, Chemistry 105, 
Chemistry 111 and 113, Computer Science 141, 155, 205, Electrical Engineering 204, 
Physics 101, and 121. 

 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ENGLISH (ENGL) 
ENGL 201. ENGLISH LITERATURE SURVEY AND LITERARY STUDIES I. The first 
semester of the two-semester survey of English literature focuses on the major authors and 
representative works of each period from the early Middle Ages (Beowulf) to the 18th century. It also 
introduces students to major interpretive/critical schools of thought, as well as such foundational 
literary practices as close reading, analysis, and scansion. This course also fulfills the Writing Intensive 
(WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the English major. As such, it is the foundational 
course for the English major and should be taken in the first semester of the program.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 202. ENGLISH LITERATURE SURVEY AND LITERARY STUDIES II. Elaborating 
upon the content, practices, and interpretive modes introduced in English 201, the second semester of 
the two-semester survey of English literature focuses on the major authors and representative works 
of each period from the late 18th century to the modern era. Prerequisite: English 201. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 203. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY I. The first semester of the two-semester survey 
of American literature focuses on representative works from the time of the discovery of America to 
the Civil War. Attention is concentrated on major writers and their works in each period with some 
consideration given to all genres except drama. English majors are strongly encouraged to take 203 
before 204. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 204. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY II. The second semester of the two-semester 
survey of American literature focuses on representative works from post-Civil War to the late 20th 
century. Attention is concentrated on major writers and their works in each period with some 
consideration given to all genres except drama. Non-English majors may enroll in 204 without having 
taken 203, but English majors are strongly encouraged to take 203 before 204.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 205. WORLD LITERATURE SURVEY: ASIA. A survey of representative authors and 
works of Asia, with a special focus on the literature of China, India, and Japan. The 205-206 survey is 
designed to include works of cultures and regions not covered by the English and American literature 
surveys or the classical and European literature in the required Humanities 202: Civilization & 
Literature. Students may take either or both courses, in either sequence.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 206. WORLD LITERATURE SURVEY: AFRICA AND LATIN AMERICA. A survey of 
representative authors and literary works of Africa and Latin America, including the Caribbean. The 
205-206 survey is designed to include works of cultures and regions not covered by the English and 



English / 197 
 

American literature surveys or the classical and European literature in the required Humanities 202: 
Civilization & Literature. Students may take either or both courses, in either sequence.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 221. SCIENCE FICTION. This course introduces students to the many ways science fiction 
engages a range of cultural and social issues, such as the nature of science and scientific exploration, 
science and ethics, scientific dystopia, technological apocalypse, relationships between faith and 
science, cybernetics and human identity, transhumanism, medical ethics, and nanotechnology. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 222. FANTASY LITERATURE. This course is designed to introduce students to the major 
features that characterize fantasy as a literary genre. Students will read 16-18 fantasy novels, including 
authors such as C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, Madeleine L’Engle, Ursula LeGuin, and J. K. Rowling. Class 
time will be spent analyzing these novels and critiquing them as works of literature.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 224. ARTHURIAN LITERATURE. This survey course follows King Arthur across the 
centuries and literary genres from his seminal appearances in medieval histories and literature to latter 
interpretations – Victorian, Modernist, Inkling, and post-modernist in English and American prose 
fiction, film, and poetry. Authors include, but are not limited to, Chretien de Troyes, Thomas Malory, 
Tennyson, Twain, Eliot, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, the Wizard Tim, and Malamud. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 226. GOTHIC LITERATURE. This course is a historical survey of Gothic literature from 
the eighteenth to the twentieth century, focusing mainly on literary Gothicism of Europe and America. 
The course also explores how films and other literary genres have appropriated Gothic elements in the 
twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 242. 19th CENTURY ENGLISH NOVEL. A study of major works by authors from the great 
age of the English novel, including Austen, the Brontes, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Conrad, and Wilde. 
Prerequisite English 202 or by permission. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 243. 20th CENTURY ENGLISH NOVEL. A study of the themes and technical developments 
which emerge in the novels of such authors as Woolf, Forster, Joyce, Waugh, Greene, and selected 
contemporary authors. Prerequisite English 202 or by permission.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 245. 19th CENTURY AMERICAN NOVEL. This course explores the romances of 
Hawthorne and Melville; the realism of Mark Twain, Henry James, and Chopin; and the naturalism of 
Dreiser, along with works by other key writers. Prerequisite: English 203 and 204 or by permission.
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 246. 20th CENTURY AMERICAN NOVEL. This course gives students experience with the 
long fiction of such writers as Cather, Hemingway, Faulkner, Fitzgerald, Ellison, Morrison, Percy, and 
others. Prerequisite: English 204 or by permission. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 250. WORLD DRAMA. An introduction to the great playwrights and representative plays of 
world drama from the Greeks to the present. Students study elements of plot, characterization, and idea 
in each of the plays studied. The course also focuses on the theatrical and historical context of each 
play and playwright. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 252. MODERN DRAMA. A study of major plays and playwrights of the late nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, including Ibsen, Chekhov, Shaw, O'Neill, Beckett, Stoppard, and recent American 
and British playwrights. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 254. PAGE TO STAGE. Students will travel to a major theatre venue such as New York City 
(Broadway and Off-Broadway shows); Niagara-on-the-Lake, Canada (Shaw Festival); Staunton, VA 



198 / Grove City College 

(American Shakespeare Center); Stratford, Canada (Stratford Festival); or various other global cities 
that have large theatre centers. Students will read and be quizzed on selected plays prior to travel. 
While there, students will attend three to five plays, attend daily post-play discussion sessions and 
workshops, and keep a guided response journal. Upon their return, students will submit a four to five-
page paper as their final exam. Cost of the trip will vary depending on location. 
 Travel course, offered periodically, one to three hours. 
 
ENGL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in English. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
ENGL 261. POETRY. This course explores a wide range of traditional and contemporary poetry; 
gives insight into ways poets use imagery, rhyme, meter, persona, and sound qualities to create 
meaning in poetry; provides experience with prosody and offers in-depth experience with the work of 
selected poets. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 262. MODERN POETRY. This course provides a more intensive examination of the poets 
and poetry of the 20th century. Students will examine the most significant movements in poetry of this 
period, including Modernism in the first half of the century and post-modern experiments of recent 
decades. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
English. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENGL 290. STUDIES IN LITERATURE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth 
study of authors and works of literature not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 302. CLASSICAL LITERATURE IN TRANSLATION. A study of the major works of 
ancient and medieval Greek, Roman, Latin, and Italian literature from Homer to Dante with particular 
emphasis on epic and tragedy. The influence of classical literature on later Western literature will also 
be considered. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 304. CHAUCER AND THE MIDDLE AGES. An introduction to the literature and art of the 
Middle Ages, from Beowulf, through Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and The Canterbury Tales, to 
the religious drama of the later Middle Ages. Prerequisite: English 201. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 306. ENGLISH RENAISSANCE: SPENSER TO MILTON. A survey of major English 
writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries from Spenser, Donne, and Jonson to John Milton. 
Prerequisite: English 201 or by permission. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 308. RESTORATION AND 18th CENTURY LITERATURE. An introduction to the works 
of principle authors from 1660 to 1750 such as Dryden, Pope, Swift, and Johnson. The simultaneous 
codification of rules and outbreak of the Romantic temper will be traced. Prerequisite: English 201.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 312. ROMANTIC LITERATURE. An intensive examination of the poetry of the six major 
English Romantic poets of the early nineteenth century: Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, 
Shelley, and Keats. Students also read major critical prose by and about these poets. Prerequisite: 
English 202 or by permission. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 314. VICTORIAN LITERATURE. A study of the major British writers of the period from 
1837 to 1900, focusing particularly on Tennyson, Robert Browning, Christina Rossetti, Gerard Manley 
Hopkins, and Oscar Wilde. Prerequisite: English 202. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 



English / 199 
 

ENGL 318. AMERICAN RENAISSANCE. An opportunity for students to explore an unusually 
productive phase in the history of ideas in America through literature of outstanding quality including 
works of Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville, and Whitman. The dynamics of interaction among 
members of that group will be studied. Prerequisite: English 203 or by permission.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 320. SOUTHERN LITERATURE. With significant emphasis on the works of William 
Faulkner, this course explores the great flowering of literature in the American South in the twentieth 
century. Such writers as Robert Penn Warren, Richard Wright, Eudora Welty, Flannery O’Connor, and 
Walker Percy are also considered, especially as they seek to move beyond the “aesthetic of memory” 
that characterizes Faulkner’s novels. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 324. EUROPEAN LITERATURE. A study of European fiction in translation, with major 
emphasis on the novel, highlighting the work of writers such as Flaubert, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and 
Mann. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 325. CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE. A study of American, European and world 
literature of the last three decades, with particular emphasis on Nobel and other award-winning authors. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 327. CHRISTIAN WRITERS. This course acquaints students with a wide variety of writers 
from the early twentieth century to the present whose works express and engage Christianity in 
significant ways. It examines the question of how Christians faithfully practice the discipline of reading 
and writing and offers students opportunities to develop their own creative and devotional practices. 
Operating on the premise that there is a place for many kinds of literary genius in the kingdom of God, 
this course challenges students intellectually and encourages them spiritually. 
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 351. SHAKESPEARE I. One of two courses which together examine 20 of the 37 plays of 
William Shakespeare. Each semester begins with a study of the sonnets and then focuses on ten of the 
major plays, selected from the comedies, histories, tragedies and romances. Class discussion is 
supplemented with a required lab session for the viewing and discussion of performances of the plays 
under study. Either Shakespeare course will satisfy the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the 
English major. Plays for the fall semester usually include Richard III, Taming of the Shrew, Merchant 
of Venice, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Romeo and Juliet, Much Ado About Nothing, Henry V, Julius 
Caesar, Othello, and The Winter's Tale. Students may take either or both courses, in either sequence. 
Prerequisite: English 202 or by permission. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 352. SHAKESPEARE II. One of two courses which together examine 20 of the 37 plays of 
William Shakespeare. Each semester begins with a study of the sonnets and then focuses on ten of the 
major plays, selected from the comedies, histories, tragedies and romances. Class discussion is 
supplemented with a required lab session for the viewing and discussion of performances of the plays 
under study. Either Shakespeare course will satisfy the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the 
English major. Plays for the spring semester usually include: As You Like It, Twelfth Night, Richard II, 
1 Henry IV, Measure for Measure, Hamlet, Macbeth, King Lear, Cymbeline, and The Tempest. 
Students may take either or both courses, in either sequence. Prerequisite: English 202 or by 
permission. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGL 356. LITERARY THEORY. A detailed examination of the major literary critics and theorists 
of Western civilization. Part one is devoted to key figures of the Classical tradition; Part two uses basic 
tenets of that tradition to engage and critique the "new wave" of 20th and 21st century critical theory. 
The class employs a seminar format; students lead discussion on a rotating basis and are expected to 
contribute significantly to every discussion. This course is strongly recommended for all students 
considering graduate study in English. Prerequisites: English 201, 202, 203, and 204, junior or senior 
English major; or by permission. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



200 / Grove City College 

ENGL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive background in 
literature to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Junior standing in the 
English Department, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed study.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENGL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
English. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENGL 390. STUDIES IN LITERATURE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth 
study of authors and works of literature not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 402. GRAMMAR AND HISTORY OF ENGLISH. Required of English majors seeking 
secondary certification in English, this course offers an introduction to the history of the English 
language, a review of traditional grammar, and presentation of a working knowledge of modern 
grammar. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive background in 
literature to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Senior standing in the 
English Department, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed study.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENGL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
English. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ENGL 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGLISH. Students majoring in English may, with prior consent of 
the department, earn academic credit for work done (normally off campus) under the direct supervision 
of a professional in an English-related field. This includes but is not limited to such fields as publishing, 
library science, journalism, technical writing, and script writing. Students must keep a daily log of 
activities and submit an academic paper summarizing the experience. A maximum of six credits of 
internship may apply toward graduation. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
ENGL 485. SENIOR CAPSTONE. As a culminating experience for senior English majors, this 
seminar-style course provides students an opportunity to reflect on their college literary studies; to 
deepen their understanding of literature, its role in the pursuit of truth, and its place in their lives, 
especially as Christians; and to apply what they have learned as majors in completing a substantial 
project. This project will focus on a significant work, author, or literary topic and should reflect 
thorough research, thoughtful analysis, and clear communication. The course subject matter varies 
each semester to reflect the interests and expertise of the professor. Prerequisite: Senior status in the 
English program. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGL 499. HONORS IN ENGLISH. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in literature may, 
with consent of the department, undertake this course on an individual basis. The format is similar to 
that of the independent study, but students must also submit their papers to the entire English faculty 
and provide an oral presentation and defense of their research.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

THEATRE (THEA) 
THEA 210. INTRODUCTION TO MUSICAL THEATRE. This class is a survey of the 
development of musical theatre as a performing art form in America from 1750 to the present. By 
looking at musical theatre from multiple perspectives - historical, cultural, political, social, aesthetic - 
the class will explore the ways in which musicals both reflect and embody values and trends of the 



English / 201 
 

cultural landscape in which they were written. Included will be practical study of the format of the 
libretto and musical score in relationship to the major musical theatre genre. Students may only receive 
credit for one of Theatre 210 or Music 210. Semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 251. ACTING. Practice in preparing a dramatic role for performance. Exercises will focus on 
freeing the actor’s voice and body for maximum expressiveness. Students will prepare and perform 
monologues, short scenes, and a single extended scene. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
THEA 255. ORAL INTERPRETATION OF LITERATURE. Study and practice of the techniques 
of reading literature aloud to enhance audience appreciation and enjoyment. Oral readings are given in 
the areas of fiction, poetry, and drama. Each student also prepares and performs a final ten-minute 
recital. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
THEA 259. THEATRE PRACTICUM. Students may receive one credit for a minimum of 40 hours 
of supervised technical theatre work directly related to a main-stage theatre production. Students must 
keep an ongoing record of the dates and times of their work, and the student’s supervisor must sign 
each entry. These records are due by Study Day of the semester enrolled. This course is repeatable, but 
no more than three hours may count toward the Theatre minor. It will count as a general elective if 
taken more than three times. Semester course, one hour. 
 
THEA 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive background in 
theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Sophomore standing with 
declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed study.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 261. STAGECRAFT. This course covers the technical work of set-design, lighting, sound 
design, and stage rigging as well as administrative/budgetary management of technical theater. A 
practical course taught both in the classroom and in hands-on settings. Students will be required to 
assist in various productions and live performances throughout the semester. Note: for safety reasons, 
no minors may enroll in this course, and students should be aware that some lifting and handling of 
power tools is required. Semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 262. DESIGN FOR THE THEATRE. Focuses on the visual aspects of theatrical production, 
including set design, costume design, and lighting design. Through group and individual projects, 
students will work through the design process: analyzing the text, doing research, formulating a 
production concept, and applying the elements of design to create a visual world for the actors to 
inhabit. They will also practice the skills necessary to communicate their ideas to both a director and 
technical crews: drawing, drafting, model building, and organizational paperwork.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
theatre. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 290. STUDIES IN THEATRE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth 
study of aspects of theatre not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 320. STAGE DIRECTION. Theories and techniques of directing plays for the stage. 
Principles of play analysis, blocking, characterization, and rhythm are studied. The student will direct 
laboratory scenes, prepare production scripts, do script analyzes, and produce an extended scene. 
Prerequisite: Theatre 251. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
THEA 351. ADVANCED ACTING. Study and practice of advanced techniques of acting. Students 
will also focus on vocal production, movement, and elements of style related to the performance of 
plays from various periods of theatre history. Prerequisite: Theatre 251. Semester course, three hours. 



202 / Grove City College 

 
THEA 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive background in 
theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Junior standing with 
declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed study. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
theatre. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 384. PLAYWRITING. This course emphasizes the various aspects of writing an effective 
play. Topics include the processes of drafting and revision, analyses of literary style and technique, 
and methods of offering and accepting constructive criticism. Additionally, the collaborative nature of 
playwriting will be addressed; a play is not complete until the writer has involved others in the creative 
process. The student is expected to submit original manuscripts during the semester. Students may 
only receive credit for one of Theatre 384 or Writing 384.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 390. STUDIES IN THEATRE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth 
study of aspects of theatre not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
THEA 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive background in 
theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics. Senior standing with 
declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed study. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
theatre. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
THEA 480. INTERNSHIP IN THEATRE. Students pursuing a minor in Theatre may, with prior 
consent of the Department, earn academic credit for work done (normally off campus) under the direct 
supervision of a professional in a theatre-related field. Students must keep a daily log of activities and 
submit an academic paper summarizing the experience. A maximum of six credits of internship may 
apply toward graduation. Semester course, one to six hours. 

WRITING (WRIT) 
WRIT 101. FOUNDATIONS OF ACADEMIC DISCOURSE. A course introducing students to the 
fundamentals of college composition. Topics include the writing process, rhetorical strategies, basics 
of critical reading and thinking, and key forms of writing such as informative, evaluative, 
argumentative, and synthesis. This course serves as a foundation to prepare students to succeed in other 
academic writing contexts. This course contains the Information Literacy (IL) requirement. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in writing. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
WRIT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
writing. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



English / 203 
 

WRIT 271. CREATIVE WRITING. An exploration of the elements and techniques of writing short 
fiction and poetry. Informal lectures and discussions focus on student writing. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 272. DEVELOPING CHARACTERS. A creative writing course that will allow students to 
develop character backstory and explore the impact of character psychology on action and in dialogue. 
Concepts will enhance character development for film scripts, short stories, novels, and more. Students 
may only receive credit for one of Communication Arts 272 or Writing 272. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 281. CREATIVE NON-FICTION. An exploration of the elements and techniques of writing 
creative nonfiction, including such forms as personal essays, memoirs, travel writing, biography, 
literary journalism, book reviews, and lyric essays. Informal lectures and discussions focus on student 
writing. Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 290. STUDIES IN WRITING. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth study 
of writing concepts, issues, and practices not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 305. TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION. This course explores elements of clear and 
effective writing and oral expression appropriate for careers in the technical professions. Coursework 
will include case studies, job search materials, set of instructions, standard professional 
correspondence, examination of social media in professional settings, oral presentation with 
presentation software, and research into a technical field with the goal of communicating that field to 
non-experts. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 310. BUSINESS COMMUNICATION. This course explores elements of clear and effective 
writing and oral expression for business-related professions. Coursework includes business 
communication case studies, job search materials, business correspondence (e-mail, memos, and 
letters), business proposals, business plans, oral presentations, social media in the business world, and 
formal business reports. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 315. TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL DOCUMENT DESIGN. This course explores 
principles, techniques, and procedures of electronic and print-based document production. Topics 
include the relationship between written and visual material; traditional copy preparation and design; 
desktop publishing; traditional printing techniques for books, brochures, pamphlets, and newsletters; 
and an introduction to electronic document design and production. Students will study key layout and 
design concepts and analyze examples. Student will produce their own documents, including 
newsletters, small and large advertisements, brochures, flyers, online journal or newspaper blog space, 
and a website entry page. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 320. PROFESSIONAL EDITING. This course provides an overview of key concepts and 
skills essential for the professional editor. It will cover standard proofreading marks, the creation and 
use of style guides, communication with authors and publishers, best practices in freelance editing, and 
feedback tools in Microsoft Word and Adobe Acrobat. Students will gain competency in editing both 
fiction and non-fiction prose as proofreaders, copyeditors, content editors, and developmental editors.  
Prerequisite: Writing 101.  Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 359. SCREENWRITING. This course is an introductory course for screenwriters. Topics of 
study will include character development, plot structure, storytelling techniques in film, as well as the 
narrative structure. Students will study films and screenplays as they learn to recognize various 
elements mentioned previously in feature films. Additionally, students will learn to craft their own 
stories for the screen. Students may only receive credit for one of Communication Arts 359 or Writing 
359. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
 



204 / Grove City College 

WRIT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in writing. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
WRIT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
writing. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
WRIT 382. POETRY WRITING. This course explores various forms and elements of lyric poetry 
and gives students the opportunity to develop their craftsmanship and poetic vision. In addition to 
producing their own poetry, students will analyze poems by published writers and fellow students, 
explore the literary marketplace, and read essays on poetics and on the role of the Christian artist. 
Prerequisite: Writing 101. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 383. STORY WRITING. This course explores various forms and elements of the short story 
and gives students the opportunity to develop their craftsmanship and narrative vision. In addition to 
producing their own stories, students will analyze stories by published writers and fellow students and 
read essays on fiction writing and on the role of the Christian artist. Prerequisite: Writing 101.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 384. PLAYWRITING. This course emphasizes the various aspects of writing an effective 
play. Topics include the processes of drafting and revision, analyses of literary style and technique, 
and methods of offering and accepting constructive criticism. Additionally, the collaborative nature of 
playwriting will be addressed; a play is not complete until the writer has involved others in the creative 
process. The student is expected to submit original manuscripts during the semester. Students may 
only receive credit for one of Theatre 384 or Writing 384.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 390. STUDIES IN WRITING. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an in-depth study 
of writing concepts, issues, and practices not covered in as much detail in other courses.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
WRIT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in writing. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
WRIT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
writing. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
WRIT 480. INTERNSHIP IN WRITING. This course offers practical experience in the field of 
writing. Prerequisite: Sophomore status or higher and permission of the department internship 
coordinator. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF EXERCISE SCIENCE 
Dr. Prins, Chair; Dr. Ault, Dr. Buxton, Dr. Gerhart, Mr. Gibson. Additional Instructional 
Faculty: Mr. Cook, Mr. Garvey, Mr. Patterson, Dr. Wise. 

POLICIES GOVERNING THE EXERCISE SCIENCE PROGRAM 
 The Department of Exercise Science and Grove City College believe that a Christian 
liberal arts college should teach the "whole individual”, giving careful attention to the 
development of psychomotor (physical development), cognitive (basic reasoning), and the 
affective (social, emotional and spiritual) behavioral goals of the student regardless of 
his/her major. 



Exercise Science / 205 
 

 In an attempt to realize this philosophy, the Department of Exercise Science presents a 
balanced program that encompasses the many facets of exercise science. The specific 
objectives of the program are to develop a heightened awareness of personal fitness and 
wellness, to develop neuromuscular skills, to cultivate an interest in recreation, and to 
encourage desirable social and moral standards. 
VISION 
 The Department of Exercise Science is committed to educating, serving, and 
developing student’s and future leaders to advance the state of lifelong health, wellness and 
physical activity among members of both local and extended communities. 
 
MISSION 
 Our mission is to provide student-centered instruction, conduct research, perform 
service, and promote health and well-being through discovery, learning, and participation 
in the study of Exercise Science in a Christian community. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Exercise Science—92-95 
hours 

Exercise Science Core (59 hours): 
Exercise Science 101, 203, 230, 244, 253, 254, 256, 258, 304, 306, 307, 309, 310, 
312, 313, 377, 404, 407, and 480. 

Exercise Science Electives (15-17 hours): 
Choose fifteen hours from Exercise Science 102, 134, 201, 205, 210, 215, 220, 221, 
223, 235, 237, 240, 242, 245, 250, 251, 261, 305, 344, 402, 403; or choose to 
complete one of the following concentrations: 

Athletic Training: Exercise Science 215, 237, 249, 251, 261, and three additional 
hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above. 
Coaching: Exercise Science 201, 205, 251, 305, Management 312, and three 
additional hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above. 
Personal Training: Exercise Science 220, 221, 240, 261, 402, and three additional 
hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above. 
Physiological Sciences: Exercise Science 237, 242, 245, 344, and three additional 
hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above. 
Pre-Occupational Therapy: Psychology 209, 211, Sociology 101, Exercise 
Science 215, 250, and one of Biology 102 or Psychology 312. 
Pre-Physical Therapy: Biology 102, Chemistry 112 and 114, Physics 122, 
Exercise Science 250, and one of Psychology 209 or 211. 
Strength & Conditioning: Exercise Science 221, 240, 261, 403, and three 
additional hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above. 

Major-Related Requirements (18-19 hours): 
Biology 101; Chemistry 111 and 113; Mathematics 111 or 161; Physics 121; and 
Psychology 201. 

 
Courses that count in the Exercise Science major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “EXER” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.50 is required by the end of 
the sophomore year and maintained through graduation. Transfer students and students 
changing their major after freshman year will be evaluated after their second semester as an 
Exercise Science major. Students on academic probation will be evaluated after one 
semester and students below a 2.50 MQPA will be moved to the Undeclared (UNSE) major 
designation. Students with a MQPA below 2.50 will not be permitted to register for EXER 
480. 



206 / Grove City College 

 The following courses provide instruction in locating, evaluating and presenting 
information related to the Exercise Science discipline: Exercise Science 377 Research 
Methods — Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL), and Exercise Science 
307 Exercise Prescription— Speaking Intensive (SI) 
 
Course Requirements for a Minor in Exercise Science (23 hours of required courses) 
 A minor in Exercise Science will consist of Exercise Science 101, 203, 221, 244 or 
254, 253, 256, and 258. Biology 341 may be taken in the place of Exercise Science 253. 
 
 The Exercise Science minor curriculum has the potential to enrich the academic 
preparation of students pursuing majors in Biology, Chemistry, Education, and even 
Business Program majors with entrepreneurial aspirations in commercial or community-
based health, fitness, or athletics. The curriculum also provides an opportunity for students 
in pursuit of health-related professions which require graduate studies, doctoral research 
and/or professional training. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Nutrition (15 hours) 
 A minor in Nutrition will consist of Exercise Science 134, 240, 244, 254, and 344. 

 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

EXERCISE SCIENCE (EXER) 
EXER 101. INTRODUCTION TO EXERCISE SCIENCE. This course introduces students to the 
field of Exercise Science, requirements for professional certification, graduate school requirements, 
and career options in both health fitness and clinical fields. Lecture topics will include the mission and 
vision of the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), the Commission on Accreditation for 
Exercise Science, and the Department of Exercise Science. Students will become familiar with the 
ACSM JTAs (Job Task Analysis) which will be covered across the Exercise Science curriculum. 
Students will begin to create individual portfolios to show how the JTAs and department objectives 
are met across the curriculum. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EXER 102. FAITH AND FITNESS. This course will integrate online lecture and discussion to 
investigate the relationship between faith, health, and fitness. As this relationship is unraveled, students 
will gain a greater understanding of what it means to be called, how faith can impact health, how fitness 
and health behaviors can impact faith, and how faith can be integrated into the health and fitness 
industry. Summer online only, one hour. 
 
EXER 134. INTRODUCTION TO NUTRITION. An introduction to the importance of diet for 
present and future good health. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, and minerals, and their 
interactions will also be addressed. In addition, the course explores topics such as label-reading, 
popular diets, dietary analysis, and other issues of current interest in the field of nutrition, including 
sport and exercise nutrition, supplements, and life-cycle nutrition. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 201. ETHICS IN SPORTS. This course will explore the concepts of sport and competition in 
the context of a Christian world view. Special emphasis will be given to the theology of competition, 
a biblical foundation for spiritual integrity and ethical conduct, the mind and heart of the Christian 
athlete, and character and performance as a matter of Christian stewardship. Students will be 
encouraged in their spiritual maturity, promoting their athletic and intellectual development.  
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
EXER 203. EXERCISE AND SPORT PSYCHOLOGY. This course provides an overview of 
psychological theory, research and methodology with an emphasis on application within diverse 
exercise settings. Topics include the history and development exercise psychology, personal and 



Exercise Science / 207 
 

environmental factors of physical activity, use of counseling skills for behavior modification, and 
group processes within physical activity and exercise. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 205. INTRODUCTION TO SPORTS MINISTRY. This interdisciplinary course will explore 
the spreading of the gospel and what it means to be a Christian athlete through sport. Many 
opportunities for ministry are presented through sports as one of the most powerful of social institutions 
in the world. A grace-based view of the theology of sports and competition in lieu of a performance-
based approach will be the cornerstone of this course. Sports ministry will be examined as a tool for 
transforming lives through sharing the Gospel, discipleship and mentoring.  
 Semester Course, three hours. 
 
EXER 210. FITNESS SWIMMING. The purpose of this course is to expose the student to fitness 
swimming, water aerobics, workout development in swimming/water aerobics. 
 Offered periodically, two hours. 
 
EXER 215. MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY. This is an online course that will help train students to 
understand and speak commonly used terms in various healthcare fields. Topics include word 
construction, body structure terminology, and terminology related to body systems and disorders. 
 Online only, three hours. 
 
EXER 220. WELLNESS PROMOTION AND PROGRAMMING. This course examines strategies 
for successful health promotion and programming. Emphasis is placed on synthesis of various concepts 
related to wellness programming and guidelines for planning, implementing, and evaluating successful 
programs. There will be opportunities for planning, implementing, and evaluating programs for the 
Employee Wellness Program. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
EXER 221. PERSONAL TRAINING. This course will introduce students to the profession of 
personal training. Students will develop skills in exercise technique, including teaching approaches 
involving free-weight and machine exercises, cardiovascular activities, flexibility, and plyometrics. 
Program designs will include the healthy adult as well as for adults presenting unique challenges to 
exercise. Students will design and implement a program for an assigned client, whom they will train 
throughout the second half of the semester. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 223. RED CROSS LIFEGUARD TRAINING. The primary purpose of the American Red 
Cross Lifeguarding program is to provide entry-level lifeguard candidates with the skills and 
knowledge to prevent, recognize, and respond to emergencies and to provide care for injuries and 
sudden illnesses until advanced medical personnel arrive and take over. It is a certification course for 
American Red Cross Lifeguarding, CPR/PR, AED, and First Aid. An additional fee is charged for this 
course. Two and one-half hours/week. Offered periodically, two hours. 
 
EXER 228. PHYSICAL EDUCATION FOR ELEMENTARY EDUCATORS. The purpose of this 
class is to introduce the students to a basic overview of elementary physical education in order that 
they become advocates of physical education and learn to integrate movement education within their 
classrooms. Semester course, one hour. 
 
EXER 230. INTRODUCTION TO EXERCISE PROGRAM DESIGN. This course will instruct 
students in designing and implementing scientifically sound exercise programs. This includes dynamic 
and static warmup, resistance training, aerobic conditioning, speed and agility programming, and 
plyometrics. The process of needs analysis will be introduced and covered. The students will be 
introduced to basic periodization theories and program implementation and adjustment strategies. The 
course will also cover an introduction to exercise equipment types, functions, and uses. For exercise 
science students, this course will serve as an introduction to the pertinent skills and knowledge required 
of them in both their professional internship and future career. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 101.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 



208 / Grove City College 

EXER 235. FACILITY MANAGEMENT. This course will focus on the proper guidelines, standards 
and regulations necessary to successfully design and operate a safe and functional health and fitness 
facility. The minimal performance codes needed to operate legally will be examined, including 
compliance with the American Disabilities Act. The necessary steps to ensure optimum performance 
of a health and fitness facility, such as program development and marketing, will be discussed. This 
course will also cover important topics such as compliance with the American Disabilities Act, 
incorporating technical advances into the facility, hiring and training staff, emergency plans, risk 
management policies, and all federal laws and guidelines to ensure the safety of both the management 
and the users of a facility. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101. Offered periodically, two hours. 
 
EXER 237. SPECIAL TOPICS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. The purpose of this course is to 
introduce students to the EBP process and develop literacy abilities while investigating hot topics 
relevant to sport and human performance. Topics covered will include the benefits of EBP and the 
EBP process, conducting a literature search, appraising literature for best evidence, various topics in 
sport and human performance (i.e. performance enhancing drugs, movement screening for injury 
prediction and prevention, concurrent strength and endurance training, weight loss strategies, etc.). 
Prerequisite: Exercise Science 256.  Summer online only, three hours. 
 
EXER 240. DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS. This course provides an overview of the dietary 
supplement industry, current regulations, product development process, and marketing of products. 
Students will learn how to critically evaluate dietary supplements in terms of claims, efficacy, and 
safety. This course, offered online, is open to all majors. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 101 or 134. 
 Alternate years, spring semester and summer online only, three hours. 
 
EXER 242. PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF CHRONIC DISEASES. The purpose of this 
course is to provide the student with a comprehensive education on the nature of the most prevalent 
chronic diseases afflicting western society today. This course will examine the epidemiology, 
pathophysiology, prevention, and treatment of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and obesity. 
Prerequisite: Biology 101 or sophomore status. Winter and summer online only, three hours. 
 
EXER 244. NUTRITION AND HEALTH. A study of the science of nutrition with an emphasis on 
how nutrition influences health and wellbeing. Students will gain a foundational knowledge of the role 
of nutrition in the development and treatment of chronic diseases. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 
or 134.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 245. EXERCISE NEUROBIOLOGY. This course will introduce current concepts and 
literature regarding the effects of exercise on neurotrophic factors and how the brain acutely and 
chronically adapts to exercise. Summer and winter online, three hours. 
 
EXER 249. INTRODUCTION TO ATHLETIC TRAINING. The course introduces the role of the 
athletic trainer and concepts of sports medicine. Students will learn prevention, evaluation and 
treatment for athletic injuries. The course will provide an introduction to both the orthopedic 
assessment and management process as well as basics of biomechanics and ethical issues in the 
Athletic Training profession.  Prerequisite: Sophomore Standing. Fall semester, one hour. 
 
EXER 250. INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL AND OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY. This 
course will provide an introduction to the practices of physical and occupational therapy. It will 
integrate studies in biology and anatomy for application in future careers in physical or occupational 
therapy. Students will learn how to take basic medical histories, have an introduction to performing a 
general physical examination, and begin to develop differential diagnoses for various musculoskeletal 
processes. In addition, students will begin to investigate therapy modalities applicable to a variety of 
therapy needs. Throughout this course, students will gain knowledge helpful in their transition into the 
first year of an advanced health professional program. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
EXER 251. PREVENTION AND CARE OF INJURIES. The purpose of this course is to give the 
students the knowledge and skills necessary to prevent and care for athletic related injuries. The topics 



Exercise Science / 209 
 

covered include fitness training, nutrition, sports equipment, emergency situations, blood borne 
pathogens, environmental conditions, taping techniques, injury rehabilitation, psychological concerns 
with injuries, recognition of injuries, and the basic anatomy of and common injuries to the different 
parts of the body. There is an additional fee required for this course. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 
101. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 253. ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY I. This course will introduce the student to human 
anatomy and physiology with emphasis on the various body systems and how they integrate with one 
another. The effect of exercise on each system will be explored and clinical examples will be discussed. 
Laboratory exercises will include simulations using physical and computer models, as well as 
introductory tissue dissections. Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 
or Biology 341. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
EXER 254. NUTRITION IN SPORTS AND EXERCISE. Using USDA recommendations, this 
course will explore nutritional strategies for all levels of physical activity and competitive sports. 
Emphasis will be placed on energy balance, substrate metabolism, hydration, ergogenic aids, 
nutritional supplementation, and banned substances. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or 134. 

Fall semester and summer online only, three hours. 
 
EXER 256. PHYSIOLOGY OF EXERCISE. This course will survey the acute and chronic effects 
of exercise on human systems. Students will be introduced to the essentials of human movement, 
energy metabolism, cardiorespiratory function, and sport performance. Three lectures and one lab per 
week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 253 or Biology 341.  Semester course, four hours. 
 
EXER 258. ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY II. A continuation of the study of human anatomy and 
physiology with emphasis on the various body systems and how they integrate with one another. The 
effect of exercise on each system will be explored and clinical examples will be discussed. Laboratory 
exercises will include simulations using physical and computer models, as well as introductory tissue 
dissections. Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 253. Equivalent course: 
Biology 346 (Mammalian Physiology). Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
EXER 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise science. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 261. CORRECTIVE EXERCISE STRATEGIES. This course will use a combination of 
interactive lectures and hands-on workshop style teaching methods to teach students how to identify 
common postural and movement dysfunctions and the exercise strategies to address them. 
Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256 and 258. Fall semester and summer online, three hours. 
 
EXER 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
exercise science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 290. STUDIES IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. A course that covers special topics related to 
exercise science. Semester course; one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 304. EXERCISE TESTING. This course will cover fitness testing procedures for healthy and 
clinical populations. The course will follow the American College of Sports Medicine Guidelines for 
Exercise Testing. There will be a balance between lecture and laboratory work. Prerequisites: Exercise 
Science 256.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
EXER 305. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF COACHING. This course will introduce the principles of 
coaching team and individual sports. The student will be able to identify and demonstrate the personal 
and professional qualities required to become an effective coach at any level. The student will be able 
to develop a basic philosophy regarding the ethical and logical decision-making processes involved in 
coaching sports. Semester course, two hours. 



210 / Grove City College 

EXER 306. EXERCISE LEADERSHIP. This course will focus on the practical skills necessary to 
teach group exercise classes. It will provide a survey of basic instructor skills such as music selection, 
choreography and cueing. All students will experience introductory class leadership in a variety of 
traditional and contemporary modes of group exercise including strength, flexibility, cardiovascular, 
and equipment-based classes. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 230. Semester course, two hours. 
 
EXER 307. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION. This course focuses on developing exercise prescriptions 
for healthy populations as well as those with chronic diseases. Prescriptions will be based on possible 
client goals of improved health, fitness or quality of life (abilities to perform activities of daily living). 
All course work will follow the standards set by the American College of Sports Medicine. This course 
meets the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for the Exercise Science major. Prerequisite: Exercise 
Science 256. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 309. BIOMECHANICS. The purpose of this course is to study biomechanical concepts and 
principles with special focus on their applications in human movement and physical activity. Students 
will examine the relationship between internal and external biomechanical factors and their effect on 
human performance and mechanisms of injury. Both qualitative and quantitative approaches will be 
discussed and applied to movement observation. Prerequisites: Physics 121; and Exercise Science 258 
or Biology 346. Fall semester course, three hours. 
 
EXER 310. FUNCTIONAL KINESIOLOGY. This course will provide a greater understanding of 
how humans move from an integrative functional anatomy and applied biomechanical lens. 
Specifically, muscle groups and their functional relationships will be presented with application to 
simple mechanical principles. Course emphasis will be placed on anatomical and mechanical analysis 
of motion as it pertains to human movement in sports and exercise. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 
256 and 258. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 312. DIET, EXERCISE, AND CHRONIC DISEASE. This course will focus on prevalent 
chronic diseases including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia; the 
pathophysiology and etiology of these conditions; and the role of lifestyle factors such as diet and 
exercise in disease prevention and treatment. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 244 and 256. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 313. ADVANCED EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY. This course will focus on the integrative 
physiology and physiological responses to exercise. Specifically, this course will cover energetics, 
metabolism, and endocrine physiology, as well as discuss cardiovascular hemodynamics in various 
environments and respiratory exercise physiology. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256 and 258.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 344. LIFE CYCLE NUTRITION. A survey of nutrition needs throughout the stages of the 
life cycle, including pregnancy and lactation, infancy, adolescence, adult, and aging. The 
socioeconomic, cultural, and psychological influences on food and nutrition behavior will also be 
addressed. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or 134 or Biology 101. 
 Spring semester and summer online, three hours. 
 
EXER 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise science. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
exercise science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 377. RESEARCH METHODS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. This course will introduce basic 
methods of reading, understanding, evaluating, and applying research. Students will experience 
quantitative research, qualitative research, mixed-model research and research reviews. Students will 
also become acquainted with statistical concepts in research planning and design. Working in research 



Exercise Science / 211 
 

teams, students will complete a service-learning project for the Early Education Center (EEC). They 
will also write a research proposal to be continued and completed in EXER 407. This course meets the 
Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the Exercise Science major. 
Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256; Psychology 201; and Exercise Science 230 or 307. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 402. CERTIFIED EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGIST. This course will integrate the EXER 
curriculum, specifically the objectives of the ACSM certified Exercise Physiologist (EP-C). The job 
task analyses (JTAs) specific to the EP-C exam will be covered in detail. Students will apply the EP-
C JTAs in class and with personal training clients. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 304 and 307. 

Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 403. PRINCIPLES OF STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING. This course will serve as 
preparation for students who will be taking the Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) 
certification exam given by the National Strength and Conditioning Association. Prerequisite: Exercise 
Science 304 and 307.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 404. PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION AND SEMINAR. This course provides 
instructor-guided preparation for a professional certification exam offered by ACSM or NSCA. There 
is an additional cost incurred by the student to register for the certification exam and purchase the study 
materials, including practice exams, from the certifying organization. Students will determine which 
certification exam best matches their future career and complete it prior to the end of the semester, on 
or before Study Day. In addition, students will be required to complete a professional portfolio that 
will represent the body of work completed in the Exercise Science major. Prerequisite: Exercise 
Science 480. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
EXER 407. RESEARCH PRACTICUM. The students will complete the original group research 
project created in EXER 377, including data collection, statistical analysis, and a final report. Students 
will complete an individual research proposal. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 304 and 377.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
EXER 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise science. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
exercise science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
EXER 480. INTERNSHIP. Students will earn academic credit for field experience in the areas of 
applied Exercise Science, such as coaching, athletic training, strength and conditioning, health and 
fitness, physical therapy, and nutrition. Students will first determine their career path and 
corresponding professional certification. Then students will locate a facility along with an onsite 
supervisor for their internship. Professional dress is expected each day of the internship. Grade is 
dependent upon written evaluation by an on-site supervisor and the submission of the student’s written 
report to the Department of Physical Education. Students majoring in Exercise Science must earn at 
least five credits (300 clock hours) for this course. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 304, 306, and 307. 
 Semester course, one to six hours. 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION (PHYE) 
 The Physical Education program at GCC is designed to provide students with 
foundational knowledge and physical activity opportunities to begin shaping their own 
health and wellness habits. Physical Education 100 Healthful Living is a required course 
that all freshman will take in their first year at Grove City College. It is an 8-week course 
offered online during the fall and spring semesters. Current evidence and best practices will 
be presented by Grove City College’s Exercise Science faculty and the Counseling Center’s 



212 / Grove City College 

staff. All other Physical Education courses are offered as general electives and focus on the 
development of lifelong skills which will hopefully lead to a lifetime of healthy physical 
activity. 
 Upon completion of PHYE 100, a student may choose up to six additional hours of 
physical education courses with the “PHYE” prefix, but not more than one course per 
semester. Duplication of courses for credit is prohibited and the Department of Exercise 
Science reserves the right to cancel any course based on insufficient enrollment. 
 
PHYE 100. HEALTHFUL LIVING. This course introduces students to fundamental concepts 
associated with healthful living throughout the lifespan in modern society. The course will focus upon 
the promotion of health and wellness within individuals, families, and communities through an 
understanding of healthful living, development of healthy lifestyles, and avoiding or overcoming 
harmful habits. Current research and best practices will be presented to further students’ knowledge 
and help them to shape their own strategies for a healthy and fit future.  
  Semester course, online only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 190. STUDIES IN PHYCIAL EDUCATION. A course that covers special topics related to 
athletics and physical education. Semester course; one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYE 201. RACQUETBALL. The purpose of this course is to teach the fundamental skills and 
knowledge of the sport of racquetball. It will consist of lecture, practice of specific skills, and 
competition. Students will develop an appreciation of racquet ball as a means to a healthy use of leisure 
time. Two hours per week. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 207. BEGINNING BOWLING. This course will introduce students to the basic sport of 
bowling. Students will learn the nature and purpose of the game; lane, pin, and ball specifications; 
rules; basic skills; and tactical strategies of the game. Two hours per week. Semester course, one hour. 
 
PHYE 209. TENNIS. This course introduces students to the concept of tennis and its nature and 
purpose. Tennis can be the most demanding sport, or it can be played purely as a social diversion. It 
can be played by almost anyone at almost any skill level and the rules are the same the world over. 
Students will develop an appreciation for tennis as a valuable method of exercise that can be continued 
throughout one’s lifetime, increasing the development of cardio-respiratory and muscular endurance.    
Two hours per week. Semester course, one hour. 
 
PHYE 210. BALLROOM DANCING. This course explores the history, rhythm, steps and styles of 
the Foxtrot, Waltz, Tango, Cha-Cha, Rumba and Swing. Students will learn the basic skills and 
information necessary to develop and continue one’s interest in ballroom dancing, in addition to 
learning the fundamentals of lead/follow technique, dance etiquette, cooperation with a partner, and 
the ability to identify and distinguish music for each dance. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
 
PHYE 211. BEGINNING DANCE. This course explores various movement disciplines including 
elements of Ballet, Jazz, Modern Dance, Folk Dance, Musical Theater, Lyrical and Hip Hop while 
investigating the history and cultural value of dance. No prior dance experience is necessary.  
  Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 213. INTERMEDIATE DANCE. This course explores various movement disciplines 
including elements of Ballet, Jazz, Modern Dance, Musical Theater, Lyrical and Hip Hop while 
investigating the history and cultural value of dance. This course is more appropriate for the student 
with previous dance experience.  Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 215. ADVANCED DANCE. This advanced course explores various movement disciplines 
including elements of Jazz, Modern, Contemporary, Musical Theater, Lyrical and Choreography while 
investigating the history and cultural value of dance. This course is more appropriate for the student 
with previous dance experience. Prerequisite: Physical Education 213. Spring semester only, one hour. 



Exercise Science / 213 
 

 
PHYE 216. ADVANCED BALLROOM DANCING. This advanced level course continues the 
exploration of the rhythm, steps and styles of the Foxtrot, Waltz, Tango, Cha-Cha, Rumba and Swing. 
Students will learn more advanced patterns and skills in these dances, in addition to learning the 
Viennese Waltz and advanced partnering in the Swing. Prerequisite: Physical Education 210. 
  Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 217. VOLLEYBALL. This course teaches students the specific skills and knowledge of the 
sport of volleyball. Class will consist of lecture, practice of fundamental skills necessary for success 
and competition. Students will develop an appreciation for volleyball as a means to use leisure time in 
a healthy manner as they demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental skills, rules, and strategies 
necessary to participate in the sport of volleyball. Two hours per week. 
   Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Physical Education. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  

Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
physical education. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYE 290. STUDIES IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION. A course that covers special topics related to 
athletics and physical education. Semester course; one, two or three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 
Dr. Graham, Chair; Dr. Baker, Dr. Edwards, Dr. Harp, Dr. Mitchell. Additional 
Instructional Faculty: Dr. Smith. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in History—42 hours 
 History Core Requirements (33 hours): 

 History 103, 143, 144, 201, 283, 285, and 400. 
 One course from: History 334, 336, 349, 350, 357, or 379. 
 One course from: History 224, 230, or 231. 
 Two courses from: History 206 or 207 (choose one), 208, 209, or 212. 

 History Electives (9 hours): 
Three courses from: History 300- or 400-level courses, Political Science 317, 
Political Science 318, or Religion 341. 
 

Courses that count in the History major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “HIST” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in History and Social Studies 
Secondary Education Certification—88 hours 
 History Core Requirements (30 hours): 
 History 103, 141, 143, 144, 201, 209, 212, 283, 285, and 357. 
 Major-Related Requirements (18 hours): 

Economics 101, 102; Political Science 201, 204; and Sociology 103 and 201. 
 Education Requirements (40 hours): 

Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 



214 / Grove City College 

 History majors are strongly encouraged to take courses in languages, the humanities 
and the social sciences in their programs if they plan to attend graduate school in history. 
Courses at the 200 and 300 levels are open to all students.  
 The History Department seeks to equip their students with skills in professional 
writing, speaking and information literacy. History 143 is designated as Information 
Literacy (IL) course, and History 201 and 400 are designated as Writing Intensive (WI) and 
Speaking Intensive (SI), and IL courses. Information literacy instruction includes defining 
and framing significant historical research questions; distinguishing different types of 
sources; using databases to find relevant sources; critically evaluating www sites; citing 
sources correctly, respecting intellectual property and avoiding plagiarism; and synthesizing 
material from a range of electronic and traditional sources and presenting it in a cogent 
manner. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Classical Studies (21 hours) 
 A minor in Classical Studies will consist of History 207 or 290 (Rome); English 302; 
Political Science 355 or Philosophy 231; and twelve additional hours from History 204, 206, 
207 or 290 (Rome), 341, 346, 376, 410; Religion 211, 212; Political Science 355 or 
Philosophy 231; Greek 101, 102, 201, 202, 260, 360, 460; Latin 101, 102, 201, 202, 290; 
Art 201; Communication Arts 427; Music 331; and Sociology 103. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Classical Christian Education (23 hours) 
 A minor in Classical Christian Education will consist of History 204, 208, 410, 480 (2 
cr); and twelve additional hours from History 206, 207, 290 (Rome), 341, 346, 376; Religion 
211, 212; Political Science 355; Philosophy 231; Greek 101, 102, 201, 202, 260, 360, 460; 
Latin 101, 102, 201, 202, 290; Art 201; Communication Arts 427; Music 331; and Sociology 
103. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in History (18 hours) 
 A minor in History will consist of six hours from each of the three following areas: 
 American History: History 283, 285, 334, 336, 349, 350, 357, or 379. 
 European History: History 208, 209, 212, 261, 262, 265, or 372. 

Other History Electives: History 143, 144, 206, 207, 224, 231, 260, 270, 337, 338, 341, 
343, 346, 360, 370, 375, 376, 378, 390, 400, 460, 470, 480, 488; History 317, 318 or 
Political Science 317, 318; or Religion 341. 

 
Course Requirements for a minor in Medieval Studies (21 hours) 
 A minor in Medieval Studies will consist of English 304, History 208, Philosophy 232, 
and twelve hours from Art 201, English 224, 390 (Bible Study Before the Reformation), 
French 320, History 261, 341, 346, Latin 290 (Reading Latin), Music 331, Religion 341, 
390 (Bible Study Before the Reformation, and Spanish 330. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

HISTORY (HIST) 
HIST 103. FRESHMAN SEMINAR. This course is designed to take beginning history majors 
methodically through the process and techniques of historical research, from the crafting of a question 
through written and oral presentations of one’s work.  Students will also be introduced to the 
philosophical dimensions of the discipline including ways in which the historian may contribute to the 
common good. Topics of study vary depending on the instructor.  Spring semester, three hours. 
 



History / 215 
 

HIST 120. FOUNDATIONS OF HISTORY. An introduction to the principal theories, ideas, 
concepts, methods, and debates that have shaped the discipline of history. The course examines 
competing perspectives on history, human nature, and providence. It analyzes how historians use and 
evaluate evidence and provides Christian perspectives on history. Semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 141. WORLD GEOGRAPHY. An exploration of the physical and human geography of the 
globe.  Students will study the mutual interaction of demographic, economic, political, social, and 
geographic factors in human history. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 143. WORLD HISTORY I. A survey of the basic history of world societies from the earliest 
recorded development of human civilizations to the late medieval period. As an Information Literacy 
(IL) course, it emphasizes designing historical research questions; finding, evaluating, and using 
primary and secondary sources; citing sources properly; and writing a cogent paper.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 144. WORLD HISTORY II. A survey of the history of world societies from the early modern 
period to the present. Special emphasis is given to the interrelationship between the Western world and 
the non-Western world. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 201. HISTORIOGRAPHY. An introduction to the art and craft of history. Students learn the 
basics of the discipline of history, focusing on what historians do and have done, the essential concepts 
and methodologies they use, and the vocabularies they employ. Students sharpen the skills essential 
for work as a historian: critical reading, effective analysis, excellent writing, and skillful 
communication. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and 
Information Literacy (IL) requirements for History and SESS majors. Semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 204. HISTORICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION. A 
survey of the historical and philosophical foundations of education from antiquity to the present day. 
It includes an analysis of political, sociological, and financial issues related to American education 
with emphasis upon understanding the contributions of Western Civilization and the impact of 
American institutions on systems of education. Semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 206. ANCIENT EMPIRES I: NEAR EAST AND GREECE. A survey of ancient Near 
Eastern, Aegean and Hellenistic worlds with emphasis on the formation of and resistance to empires. 
The course explores the varied cultural legacies of these ancient cultures and civilizations.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 207. ANCIENT EMPIRES II: ROME. This course provides an overview of the history of 
Rome, beginning with its western Mediterranean setting and tracing its development as a Republic and 
then its formation as an ancient empire stretching from Britain to the Tigris, and from the Danube to 
the Sahara. The course analyzes in some detail the dynamics of Roman imperialism as well as the 
varied responses of diverse groups which found themselves under Rome’s sway. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
HIST 208. MEDIEVAL EUROPE. A survey of Europe from the end of the Roman Empire to the 
early fifteenth century that emphasizes the cultural and intellectual legacy of the Middle Ages.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 209. RENAISSANCE AND EARLY MODERN EUROPE. An examination of the 
Renaissance, the formation of nation states in the fifteenth century, the Reformation of the sixteenth 
century, and the political, social, and intellectual origins of modern Europe before the French 
Revolution. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 212. MODERN EUROPE. An examination of European states and the nature of European 
identity from 1789 to the present, focusing on political, economic, and social revolutions; the impact 
of the global wars of the twentieth century; and the tensions surrounding European integration from 
1945 onward.  Semester course, three hours. 
 



216 / Grove City College 

HIST 224. MODERN AFRICAN HISTORY. A survey of the peoples, events, and ideas/ideologies 
that have shaped the history of Africa from 1800 to the present. Special emphasis is given to the 
relationship between European imperialism and the current problems plaguing modern Africa. 
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 230. MODERN SOUTH ASIAN HISTORY. This course introduces the major themes, ideas, 
and events of Modern South Asian history. While each of the modern constituent nations (India, 
Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka) will be discussed in comparison to one 
another, this course will focus on the regions known today as India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. We will 
examine social change, intellectual movements, and the political currents of South Asia from the 
seventeenth century to the present.  This class will also include introductions to the cultures of South 
Asia through food, major holidays, major religions, and contemporary politics. At the end of this class, 
students will be able to narrate the major events of Modern South Asian history, understand better 
its cultural and physical geography, and recognize the ways South Asia’s past shapes its contemporary 
roles in the world.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 231. MODERN LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY. The story of Latin America from the 
beginning of the colonial period to the present. The class explores the geography and history of those 
countries colonized by Spain and Portugal in the sixteenth century, which still preserve the influence 
of Iberian political and social principles today. It also examines the subsequent political, social, and 
economic development of Latin America, the complicated relationships between individual countries 
in this region, and the increasing relationships between the region as a whole and the rest of the world.
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 253. UNITED STATES HISTORY SURVEY. An introductory survey of American history 
from its colonial origins to the present. This course will examine significant political, social, 
geographic, economic, religious, and cultural developments. Prerequisite: Middle Level Education 
majors only. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in history. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 261. BRITISH HISTORY TO 1781. A survey of British history with special emphasis on the 
development of the common law, parliament, and the British constitution. Recommended for pre-law 
students. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 262. BRITISH HISTORY SINCE 1781. A survey of British history with special emphasis on 
Britain as an imperial power and on political, social, and cultural developments at home.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 265. HISTORY OF SPAIN, 1500 TO PRESENT. An introduction to Spanish history from 
the union of the Crowns of Castile and Aragon to the present day. The central theme of the course is 
the problem of identity—how have the Iberian peoples identified themselves over time—and the 
political, religious, economic, and social difficulties historically associated with identity. 
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
 
HIST 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in history. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 283. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES TO 1865. An introductory survey of American 
history from its colonial origins until the end of the Civil War. The course examines political, social, 
economic, religious, and cultural developments. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 



History / 217 
 

HIST 285. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1865. An introductory survey of 
American history from Reconstruction to the present. The course examines political, social, economic, 
religious, and cultural developments. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 317. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES I. A study of the development 
of the United States Constitution through use of the case study method. This course especially focuses 
on the constitutional powers of the three branches of government, the relationship between state and 
federal governmental powers, and property rights and economic liberties. Students may not receive 
credit for both History 317 and Political Science 317. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 318. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES II. A study of the development 
of the United States Constitution through the use of the case study method. This course especially 
focuses on the idea of equality and the equal protection clause, due process, privacy and liberty rights, 
freedom of speech, press and religion and other Bill of Rights issues. Students may not receive credit 
for both History 318 and Political Science 318. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 334. AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. An exploration of arguably the pivotal event in American 
history, this course will examine the origins, events, ramifications, and presentations of the war. 
Students will study its decisive moments, seminal leaders, and formative ideas as well as examining 
historiographical and popular treatments of the war. Students will delve into both primary and 
secondary historical sources, including biography and fiction, in order to understand the events, 
portrayals, analyses, and impact of the Civil War. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 336. UNITED STATES MILITARY HISTORY. A study of the socio-political, economic, 
technological and human aspects of war that traces the development of “the American art of war” from 
the early colonial period to the present. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 337. GLOBAL MILITARY HISTORY I. A thematic overview of military history in a global 
perspective from the Paleolithic era to 1870. This course focuses upon the tactics and strategies of 
armies and powers of the past, as well as traces how warfare reflects the social, cultural, economic, 
and political circumstances of the peoples who wage it. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 338. GLOBAL MILITARY HISTORY II. A thematic overview of military history in a global 
perspective from 1870 to the present. This course will trace the development of warfare during this 
period, from strategy and tactics to weaponry, while also examining whether the concept of “modern 
warfare” exists. In addition, the course will trace the relationship between society and the military and 
how warfare reflects the societies that wage it. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 341. THE RISE OF CHRISTIANITY. This course analyzes Christianity as it grew from an 
obscure movement into a dynamic force which swamped the pagan cults of the Roman Empire. Major 
topics include Roman paganism, Roman religious policy, the growth and persecution of Christianity, 
tensions between Christianity and classical culture, and the development of early medieval Europe and 
Byzantium. Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 346. BYZANTIUM AND ISLAM. A thematic overview of the pre-modern Byzantine and 
Islamic worlds, from their common roots in the Mediterranean world of Late Antiquity to the 
establishment of the Islamic Empires and Kingdoms of the Near East, Asia, and Africa. The course 
traces the transformation, flourishing, and decline of Byzantium concurrently with the rise of Islam to 
world dominance. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
HIST 349. AMERICAN RELIGIOUS HISTORY. An exploration of religion in America that 
focuses on the various individuals and religious groups, events, ideas, and organizations that have had 
the most significant impact on American life. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 350. SPORTS IN AMERICAN HISTORY. An overview of sports in America from colonial 
times until the present that focuses especially on the relationship between sports and society and issues 
of race, class, and gender. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 



218 / Grove City College 

HIST 357. MINORITIES IN AMERICAN HISTORY. An examination of the experience of 
minority groups in America focusing on Native Americans, immigrants, women, African Americans, 
and Asian Americans. The course analyzes the problems these groups experienced and their 
contributions to America. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for students with substantial background 
in college history courses. Intensive and independent research into a particular historical question. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in history. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 372. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND NAPOLEON. An investigation of the French 
Revolution and Napoleonic France. Organized in a seminar format, this course analyzes the causes, 
major players, events, and consequences of the French Revolution. It explores the significant ideas that 
influenced or arose out of the French Revolution and the effect these ideas have on our current 
understanding of politics, society, and human nature. It assesses the pivotal role Napoleon Bonaparte 
played in the French Revolution and the debate over whether he represents the fruition of, or the 
antithesis to, the Revolution. Finally, the course examines the concept of revolution, evaluating the 
description or definitions of revolutions, and similarities between the French and other modern or pre-
modern revolution.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 375. WORLD WARS I AND II. An exploration of the global impact of the two pivotal events 
of the twentieth-century world, examining the origins, events and ramifications of World Wars I and 
II. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 376. ALEXANDER THE GREAT AND THE HELLENISTIC WORLD. An exploration of 
the life of Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic world created by his conquests. The course analyzes 
how the traditions of the Greeks were synthesized with the heritage of western Asia and northeast 
Africa to shape a world stretching from the Balkans to India.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
  
HIST 378. FOOD AND FEASTING IN THE WESTERN TRADITION. An examination of the 
mystery and wonder of man as the only animal who eats instead of feeds. The course will analyze the 
dining patterns and habits of the Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, and early Christians. Through the 
developments in dining brought about by the Industrial Revolution and the global economy, students 
will learn that mealtimes are more than a mere intersection of meat and drink. On a deeper level, our 
meals represent the intersection of theology, philosophy, history, and poetry. This amazing interplay 
reaches its epic fulfillment in the Feast – a special time at which family, congregations, and local 
communities gather round to celebrate the Abundance and the Divine. 
  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 379. AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL HISTORY. A study of American thought from the 
colonial era to the mid twentieth century. This course examines a variety of significant texts and key 
thinkers, seeking to understand them within their particular historical and cultural contexts.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 390. STUDIES IN HISTORY. Specialized subject matter that varies each semester depending 
upon interests of the instructor and students. Semester course, three hours. 
 
HIST 400. SENIOR RESEARCH SEMINAR. A seminar designed to take seniors methodically 
through the process of writing a substantial research paper in history. It includes selecting a topic, 
conducting research (mostly in primary sources), constructing a detailed outline, writing, and 
presenting a paper. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and 
Information Literacy (IL) requirements for History majors. Semester course, three hours. 



History / 219 
 

 
HIST 410. SEMINAR IN CLASSICAL & CHRISTIAN EDUCATION. An intensive exploration 
of how the Christian faith illuminates academic study. This course will examine how faith and learning 
interacted in the West historically as well as how to apply the Christian faith to the operation of 
educational institutions and disciplines in the future. Throughout the course, special emphasis will be 
placed on contemporary Classical-Christian school movement as a case study of one way Christians 
are currently attempting to bring historical lessons and their faith to bear on education. 
  Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
HIST 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for students with substantial background 
in college history courses. Intensive and independent research into a particular historical question. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in history. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 480. INTERNSHIP IN HISTORY. A semester of intensive study and work, usually off-
campus, undertaken by the student with the approval of the faculty of the Department of History. A 
student must have a minimum QPA of 3.0 and may not have completed an internship in any other 
department, although exceptions may be made for a GCCI internship. Students are required to keep a 
journal of weekly activities and complete a project agreed upon with the Department. An internship in 
history may be taken at any institution that practices Public History. Semester course, one to six hours 
. 
HIST 488. SEMINAR IN HISTORY. An advanced course for junior and senior students desiring an 
in-depth exploration of one historical problem, involving individual research, discussion, oral reports, 
and written essays. Prerequisite: Permission of the department.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
HIST 499. HONORS IN HISTORY. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in history may, upon 
invitation and permission of the department, undertake special research in history. A 30-page historical 
paper and a defense of the paper before the history faculty are required. Semester course, three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS 
Dr. Jackson, Chair; Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Bonomo, Dr. Drai, Dr. Flanders, Dr. McIntyre, Dr. 
E. Smith, Dr. Thompson. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics—42-47 hours 

Math Core Requirements (23 or 24 hours): 
Mathematics 162, 210 or 213, 222, 261, 421, 465, and 488. 

Math Electives (12 hours): 
 Choose three courses from Mathematics 303, 331, 332, 365, 422, 466, or 467. At 

least one course must be Mathematics 332, 422, 466, or 467. 
 Choose one additional course from Mathematics 232, 262, 303, 331, 332, 365, 422, 

466, and 467. 
 
Major-Related Requirements (7 or 11 hours): 

Computer Science 141; Physics 101, or Physics 121 and 122. 
 

Courses that count in the Mathematics major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MATH” prefix, with the exception of Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 
119, 141, 151, 152, 201, 237, and 240. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 



220 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics and Secondary 
Education Certification—85-90 hours 
 This program fulfills the requirements of the full mathematics major and the 
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for secondary mathematics 
certification. 

Math Core Requirements (32 or 33 hours): 
Mathematics 162, 210 or 213, 222, 240, 261, 303, 331, 421, 465, and 488. 

Math Electives (6 hours): 
Choose two courses from Mathematics 232, 262, 332, 365, 422, 466, and 467 one of 
which must be chosen from Mathematics 332, 422, 466, or 467. 

Major-Related Requirements (7 or 11 hours): 
Computer Science 141; Physics 101, or Physics 121 and 122. 

 Education requirements (40 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 
 

Courses that count in the Mathematics and Secondary Education Certification major 
quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MATH” prefix, with the exception of Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 
119, 141, 151, 152, 201, 237, and 240. Mathematics Secondary Education Certification 
majors must have a minimum MQPA of 2.75 in all Mathematics courses excluding 
Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 119, 141, 151, 152, 201, and 237. 
 
 Every graduating mathematics major will receive a thorough introduction to 
mathematical ideas as well as to problem solving skills and strategies. Moreover, every 
graduate should be able to communicate technical ideas, both orally and through the use of 
a written document, and should also have an established ability to learn how to use a 
computer algebra system in particular and other library and electronic resources in general 
in order to generate, locate, evaluate, and use information. To this end, mathematics majors 
receive instruction in the use of Mathematica in the calculus sequence (Mathematics 161, 
162, and 261) and also acquire a working knowledge of a computer program in Computer 
Science 141. They also gain experience in researching and presenting results, both orally 
and through writing a substantial technical paper, in Mathematics 488 Seminar of 
Mathematics. This collection of courses serves to satisfy the Writing Intensive, Speaking 
Intensive, and Information Literacy requirements within the major. 
 
Course requirements for a concentration in Actuarial Science (55 hours) 

Students majoring in Mathematics can also earn a concentration in Actuarial Science 
by completing Mathematics 306, 331, 332, and two of Mathematics 232, 262, 303, 365, 
422, 466, or 467 with one course being at the 300-400 level for their math electives; 
Accounting 201; Finance 301; Finance 332 or 334; and Management 433. Students must 
also write a paper on probability or statistics in Mathematics 488. Students are also 
encouraged to take additional courses from Economics 101, 102, 302, and 442. The 
Mathematics 306 requirement is waived for students who pass the first actuarial exam on 
their own. 
 



Mathematics / 221 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in Mathematics (22-23 hours) 
 A minor in Mathematics will consist of 22 hours, including Mathematics 210 or 213, 
and 222 but excluding Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 119, 151, 152, 201, 237, 240, 305, 306, 
and 307. 
 
 Students interested in graduate school in mathematics are specifically advised to take 
Mathematics 365, 422, 466, and 467. 
 
 Students who are enrolled in College Algebra, Pre-Calculus, or one of the calculus 
courses and determine that they are not properly placed may change to another course within 
the pre-calculus/calculus sequence on or before the sixteenth class meeting (twelfth class 
meeting if currently in College Algebra or Pre-Calculus). The student must have the 
approval of the current instructor and the instructor of the course to which the student 
intends to move. The student must complete and return an Add/Drop Form to the Registrar’s 
Office. Note: A student may repeat a course in which he/she previously earned a grade of 
‘C-’ or lower. A student who passes a course with a ‘C’ grade or higher may not later repeat 
the same class for credit or audit unless the course is designated as repeatable for multiple 
credits. 
 
College Math Courses Taken in High School 
 Transfer credit may be awarded for mathematics courses that are equivalent or 
comparable to those offered by the Grove City College Department of Mathematics and 
completed with a grade of “C” or better. Any such courses taken before entering Grove City 
College must be listed in the catalog of the college of transfer as courses offered for degree 
credit to that college’s undergraduates, must be taken in a classroom setting where most of 
the students are college undergraduates, and must be organized and taught by college 
faculty. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

MATHEMATICS (MATH) 
MATH 110. COLLEGE ALGEBRA. Designed to help prepare students for success specifically in 
Business Calculus as well as in Pre-Calculus, this course offers a thorough treatment of linear and 
quadratic equations and inequalities, rational and radical equations, and functions and their graphs. A 
basic understanding of high school algebra is presumed. This course does not satisfy the 
Quantitative/Logical Reasoning requirement.      Semester course, three hours.  
 
MATH 111. PRE-CALCULUS. Designed to help prepare students for success in Physics 121 or 
Calculus I, this course offers a thorough treatment of function theory, analytic geometry, exponential 
and logarithmic functions, and trigonometry. A basic understanding of high school algebra and analytic 
geometry is presumed. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MATH 118. FINITE MATHEMATICS. An introduction to a variety of topics from finite 
mathematics such as sets, counting, basic probability and statistics, linear systems, matrix algebra, and 
linear programming (graphical solutions). Time permitting, additional topics such as linear 
programming with the simplex method, Markov chains, and game theory will be considered.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 119. TOPICS IN CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS. This course will consist of a 
survey of a number of mathematical ideas on an introductory level. Topics may include graph theory, 
symmetry, sequences, fractals, fair-division algorithms, apportionment, financial math, and voting 
theory. Spring semester only, three hours. 



222 / Grove City College 

 
MATH 141. BUSINESS CALCULUS. The differential and integral calculus of elementary functions 
with applications in business and economics. Students may not receive credit for both Mathematics 
141 and 161. Mathematics 161, not 141, is the prerequisite for 162. Semester course, four hours. 
 
MATH 151. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS I. This course (along with Math 152) is a conceptual 
exploration of mathematical topics related to elementary and middle school mathematics, and is part 
of a two-course, six-hour mathematics requirement specifically designed for elementary education and 
early childhood majors. Content studied includes critical thinking and problem solving, logic, sets, 
relations and functions, numeration systems and whole-number computation, integers, and elementary 
number theory. Restricted to Elementary, Special Education with Elementary, Middle Level, and 
Music Education majors only.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 152. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS II. This course continues the exploration of selected 
topics from the elementary and middle school mathematics curriculum, including rational and real 
numbers, probability, statistics, geometry, and measurement. Prerequisite: Mathematics 151 or 
permission of instructor. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 161. CALCULUS I. A first course in calculus that assumes no prior study of the subject. 
Topics include limits and continuity, differentiation, curve sketching, the fundamental theorem of 
calculus, definite and indefinite integrals, and applications. This course fulfills in part the Information 
Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics major. Prerequisite: High school mathematics including 
algebra, analytic geometry, and trigonometry. Students may not receive credit for both Mathematics 
141 and 161. Semester course, four hours. 
 
MATH 162. CALCULUS II. A continuation of Math 161 covering the topics: exponential, 
logarithmic and inverse trigonometric functions, techniques of integration, parametric equations, 
sequences, infinite series, and Taylor series. This course fulfills in part the Information Literacy (IL) 
requirement for the Mathematics major. Prerequisite: Mathematics 161 or permission of instructor.  
 Semester course, four hours. 
 
MATH 201. STATISTICAL METHODS. An introduction to the basic methods and techniques of 
statistical inference including descriptive measures, probability distributions, tests of hypotheses, 
interval estimation, and analysis of variance. Students may only receive credit for one of Mathematics 
201, Management 201, or Psychology 201. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 210. COMBINATORICS. A study of the foundations of mathematics in the context of 
combinatorial analysis with an emphasis on mathematical writing. Representative topics include set 
theory, functions, proof techniques, induction, enumeration techniques, the pigeon-hole principle, 
binomial and multinomial coefficients, the principle of inclusion-exclusion, and generating functions. 
Corequisite: Mathematics 162.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 213. DISCRETE MATHEMATICS FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE. A study of the 
foundations of mathematics with an emphasis on concepts related to theoretical mathematical methods 
and computer science. Topics include mathematical logic, set theory, algorithms, complexity of 
algorithms, integers, a variety of proof techniques, combinatorics, relations, graphs and digraphs, and 
trees. Corequisite: Mathematics 162. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
MATH 214. APPLIED PROBABILITY AND LINEAR ALGEBRA. An overview of probability 
and linear algebra, with an emphasis on applications and concepts for computer science. Topics include 
probability distributions, counting, conditional probability, matrix operations, vector properties, 
change of bases, Markov chains, and eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Students will not be permitted to 
receive credit for all three of Math 214, 222, and Math 331. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162. 
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
MATH 222. LINEAR ALGEBRA. A study of the theory of matrices and their applications including 
systems of linear equations, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, linear 



Mathematics / 223 
 

transformations, diagonalization, and Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
162. Spring semester only, four hours. 
  
MATH 230. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS III. This course explores the mathematical topics that 
form the grades 5-8 curriculum, including ratios and proportions, algebra, relations and functions, 
geometry, statistics, and probability. Prerequisite: Mathematics 152 or permission of instructor.
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
  
MATH 232. FINANCIAL MATHEMATICS. This is an introduction to interest theory and the 
mathematics of investment. The topics include interest rates, valuation of annuities, loan repayment, 
valuation of bonds, rates of return, term structure, and cash-flow duration and immunization. This 
course is intended to prepare students for the actuarial exam FM/2. Prerequisites: Mathematics 141 
and Accounting 201. Corequisite: Finance 301. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 237. TOPICS FOR MATH EDUCATION. This course will be taught in an independent 
format covering mathematical material useful for math education majors. Students may only receive 
credit for this course once. Prerequisite: Mathematics 151 or 152, or permission of instructor.  
 Semester course, one hour. 
 
MATH 240. MATHEMATICS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION. A course designed for the 
secondary teacher candidate in mathematics. Topics covered are history of mathematics; logic; graph 
theory; proportional reasoning; problem solving and critical thinking; geometry; algebra and functions; 
and other material applicable to secondary teachers of mathematics. Required for mathematics 
secondary education majors. Open to elementary and middle level education majors with mathematics 
concentration. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210, 213, 222, or corequisite with Mathematics 222. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MATH 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in mathematics. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 261. CALCULUS III. The final course in the three-semester calculus sequence covering: 
polar coordinates, vectors and the geometry of three-dimensional space, vector functions, partial 
derivatives, multiple integrals and vector calculus. This course fulfills in part the Information Literacy 
(IL) requirement for the Mathematics major. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.  
 Semester course, four hours. 
 
MATH 262. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A study of the elementary theory and methods for 
analytic solution of ordinary differential equations, with applications, including first order equations, 
higher order linear equations, Laplace transform methods, and series solutions (time permitting). 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 162. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 263. NUMERICAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. The study and application of 
numerical methods for solving differential equations including Euler’s method, Runge-Kutta methods, 
multi-step methods, and solutions of systems of equations. Prerequisite/corequisite: Mathematics 262 
or permission of the instructor. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
MATH 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mathematics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 303. COLLEGE GEOMETRY. This course explores various modern geometries from an 
axiomatic point of view. Topics such as sets of axioms and finite geometries, Euclidean and non-
Euclidean geometries, geometric transformations, and possibly neutral geometry will be thoroughly 
examined. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or 213, and 222. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



224 / Grove City College 

MATH 305. PUTNAM PROBLEM GROUP. The Putnam Exam is a national undergraduate 
mathematics competition consisting of 12 challenging problems administered on the first Saturday in 
December. The course will consist of meeting once a week to work on problems and discuss problem 
solving strategies.  Students not meeting the prerequisite are invited to audit the course. Students may 
take the course up to four times for credit. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.  
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
MATH 306. ACTUARIAL MATHEMATICS. An in-depth study of calculus-based probability and 
statistics topics covered by the Society of Actuaries first actuarial exam, Exam P. Topics include 
general probability, univariate probability distributions, and multivariate probability distributions with 
applications to risk and insurance. Students taking this course are required to obtain the recommended 
review manual and to register for and take Exam P. Students may take this course at most twice for 
credit. Corequisite: Mathematics 332 and instructor approval. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MATH 307. INVESTIGATIONS IN MATHEMATICS RESEARCH. An introduction to 
mathematics research. Teams of two to four students will investigate mathematical phenomena 
experimentally, detect patterns, create conjectures, and attempt to prove the conjectures and verify the 
patterns. Students may take this course at most three times for credit. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 
or 213. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
MATH 331. THEORY OF STATISTICS I. An introduction to probability and mathematical 
statistics, including counting techniques; probability spaces; independence; conditional probability; 
distributions of discrete and continuous random variables; expected values, moments and moment-
generating functions; random vectors and their distributions. A computer algebra system is used. 
Corequisite: Mathematics 261 or permission of instructor. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 332. THEORY OF STATISTICS II. The continued study of mathematical statistics 
including transformations of random variables and vectors; sampling distributions; the Central Limit 
Theorem; properties of point estimates of parameters; maximum-likelihood estimates; confidence 
intervals; hypothesis testing; contingency tables; simple and linear regression; and one-way analysis 
of variance. Statistical software and a computer algebra system are used. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
331. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students, with a 
minimum of eighteen hours in mathematics, to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 365. COMPLEX VARIABLES. An introduction to the theory of functions of a complex 
variable including complex numbers; analytic functions; derivatives and integrals of functions of a 
complex variable; Taylor and Laurent series; and mappings by functions of a complex variable. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 261. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mathematics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 390. STUDIES IN MATHEMATICS. A series of lectures/discussions on topics from such 
areas as combinatorics, number theory, algebra, geometry, statistics, computer applications, analysis, 
and topology. Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 421. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA. An introduction to formal axiomatic systems and the 
elementary theory of groups and rings. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or 213, and 222.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MATH 422. NUMBER THEORY. This course is, in part, an application of some of the ideas 
encountered in Math 421. Various results from the theory of finite groups, particularly results about 



Mathematics / 225 
 

the structure of finite cyclic groups, will be established and used to prove classical results of elementary 
number theory. The course will also cover arithmetic functions, the structure of Zn*, special numbers, 
and additional topics as time allows. Prerequisite: Mathematics 421.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students, with a 
minimum of eighteen hours in mathematics, to do intensive independent study of specialized topics. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
MATH 465. CLASSICAL ANALYSIS. This course is an introduction to real analysis and includes 
a rigorous treatment of the structure of the real number system; sequences; limits; continuity; uniform 
continuity; open and closed sets; compact sets; differentiation; the Riemann integral; and possibly 
topics from infinite series; sequences and series of functions; pointwise and uniform convergence; and 
possibly generalizations to n-dimensional or metric spaces. Prerequisites: Mathematics 210 or 213, 
and Mathematics 261. Semester course, three hours. 

 
MATH 466. INTERMEDIATE ANALYSIS. A continuation of the study of real analysis through 
rigorous treatment of material in several of the following areas: metric spaces and continuity; 
multivariable calculus; convergence and completeness; measure theory; and functional analysis. 
Prerequisites: Mathematics 222 and 465. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 467. TOPOLOGY. This course introduces students to point-set topology: a way of 
generalizing ideas from geometry and analysis. Topics include basic set theory, topological spaces, 
bases, metric spaces, continuity, connectedness, separation axioms, convergence, compactness and 
metrizability. Prerequisites: Mathematics 222 and either Mathematics 210 or 213.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MATH 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mathematics. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MATH 488. SEMINAR IN MATHEMATICS. A course for seniors that includes independent 
reading and research, student presentations, preparation for the Graduate Record Exam and Major Field 
Test and faculty lectures on advanced topics in mathematics. This course, in part, satisfies the 
requirements for a Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) 
course for the mathematics major. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Semester course, two hours. 
 
MATH 499. HONORS IN MATHEMATICS. A course available to junior and senior students on an 
individual basis. Prerequisite: Consent of the department chair. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 
Dr. Clauss, Chair; Dr. Bardy, Assistant Chair; Dr. E. Anderson, Dr. Dixon, Dr. Fair, Dr. 
Li, Dr. Richards, Dr. Ulrich. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Montgomery. 
 

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT MISSION STATEMENT, 
OBJECTIVES, AND OUTCOMES 

 Mechanical Engineering (ME) is a broad discipline that develops technological 
solutions to societal problems in order to benefit mankind. Examples of areas where we find 
these challenges are transportation, power generation, energy conversion, product design, 
manufacturing, sustainability, and production. Mechanical engineering education includes 
such diverse topics as materials science, engineering design and analysis, thermodynamics, 
solid and fluid mechanics, heat transfer, manufacturing processes, system dynamics, 
teamwork, and project management. Our graduates apply their skills to a vast array of 
problems. For instance, mechanical engineers develop renewable energy systems, new 



226 / Grove City College 

medical devices, more fuel-efficient automobiles, climate control systems for buildings, and 
so on. Mechanical engineers enjoy employment in a wide variety of areas including 
research, design, manufacturing, production, technical marketing and sales, and 
management. At Grove City College, we strive to develop our students’ God given talents 
and abilities so that they may better serve the world around them.  
 The ME Department at Grove City College offers a program leading to the Bachelor 
of Science in Mechanical Engineering (BSME) degree. The program is accredited by the 
Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org. 

Mechanical engineers must be proficient at both oral and written communications to 
communicate their solutions and designs with other engineers and society in general. 
Toward that end, the ME curriculum incorporates Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking 
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) instruction within the core course 
requirements. 
 
 The mission of our program is to produce graduates who can pursue leadership roles in 
the mechanical engineering profession. The following program educational objectives 
enable GCC mechanical engineers to meet this mission in the years following graduation: 

1. Graduates will be successfully employed in the mechanical engineering profession 
or in an alternative field. Many of our graduates will assume leadership roles in 
these positions and be recognized as effective communicators and team members. 

2. Graduates will engage in life-long learning through self-study, employer 
sponsored continuing education courses or workshops, or through formal graduate 
level education leading to an advanced degree. 

3. Graduates will demonstrate ethical behavior in the workplace and will carry out 
their professional duties in a manner that is consistent with a Christian worldview. 

Our graduates possess the following student outcomes upon graduation: 
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems applying principles 

of engineering, science, and mathematics. 
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 

needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors. 

3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. 
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 

situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts. 

5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives. 

6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions. 

7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 

 
These outcomes are met over a 4-year curriculum that starts with an exposure to the 
fundamentals of science and engineering and culminates in our senior capstone design 
experience. 
 
 Freshman Year–Introduction to the fundamentals of chemistry, physics, calculus, 
engineering computations, the profession of engineering, and the design process. Students 
also learn to use Creo, a state-of-the-art CAD tool. 



Mechanical Engineering / 227 
 

 Sophomore Year–Emphasis on the analysis of problems in statics, dynamics, 
materials science, and thermodynamics, and on the design and manufacturing process; 
students are exposed to modern machine shop practice through the fabrication of an 
individual project involving machining, fabrication, and assembly. 
 Junior Year–Analysis skills are honed in engineering math, circuit analysis, fluid 
mechanics, heat transfer, and mechanics of materials. Sound experimental and design 
techniques are reinforced in the required laboratory sequence. Students receive a solid 
grounding in dynamic systems analysis and simulation, machine design, and stress analysis. 
Opportunities for international study and travel are offered through our partnership with 
affiliated universities in Nantes, France. 
 Senior Year–A major, year-long capstone design experience includes the design and 
realization of an engineering product. Extensive computer-aided design and manufacturing 
includes the use of Creo to document, analyze and fabricate designs. Advanced 
manufacturing techniques covered include conventional and investment casting, injection 
molding, CNC machining, and TIG/MIG welding. To assure the ability to work 
professionally, seniors must complete at least 13 hours of Mechanical Engineering electives, 
choosing a minimum of three credit hours in a given systems area. In addition, at least six 
credit hours must be 400-level courses and a maximum of 4 credit hours may be earned 
through one and two credit courses. 
 

Mechanical Systems Electives: 
 MECE 303 Computer-Aided Manufacturing 
 MECE 390 Special Mechanical Engineering Topics 
 MECE 408 Mechanical Vibrations 
 MECE 410 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery 
 MECE 415 Finite Element Analysis 
 MECE 418 Human-Powered Vehicle Design 
 MECE 428 Biomechanics  
 MECE 498 Honors in Mechanical Engineering 
 MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor 
 MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor 
 ENGR 411 Control Systems 
 ROBO 301 Introduction to Robotics 
 ROBO 302 Mobile Robots 

Thermal Systems Electives: 
 MECE 321 Advanced Thermodynamics 
 MECE 391 Special Mechanical Engineering Topics 
 MECE 414 Principles of HVAC 
 MECE 416 Survey of Renewable Energy Systems 
 MECE 421 Applied Fluid Mechanics 
 MECE 499 Honors in Mechanical Engineering 
 MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor 
 MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor 
 
 Technical Electives: 
 MECE 304 Design of Experiments 
 MECE 305 Introduction to LabVIEW 
 MECE 331 Engineering Management and Cross-Cultural Communication 
 MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor 
 MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor 



228 / Grove City College 

 ENGR 301 Ethics in Engineering and Robotics 
 ENGR 390 Special Engineering Topics 
 ENGR 412 Modern Control Theory 

NOTE: Additional electives may be offered at the discretion of the department. 
 

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering—
100 hours 
 
Mechanical Engineering Core (48 hours) 

Mechanical Engineering 107, 109, 120, 201, 210, 211, 212, 214, 251, 252, 311, 312, 
316, 325, 326, 351, 352, 401; Mechanical Engineering or Robotics 451 and 452. 

Engineering Core (6 hours) 
Engineering 156, 402, and Electrical Engineering 210. 

Math/Science Core (33 hours) 
Chemistry 105*; Engineering 274**; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262; Physics 101, 
102; and one math/science elective chosen from Astronomy 206, 207; Biology 101, 
102; Chemistry 112 and 114, 227, 241, 345; Mathematics 210, 213, 222, 331; 
Physics 234, or 402. 

Mechanical Engineering Electives*** (13 hours) 
A total of 13 credit hours must be fulfilled. Choose a minimum of three hours from 
each systems area. At least six hours must be 400-level courses and a maximum of 
four credit hours may be earned through one and two credit courses. 

Mechanical Systems electives 
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 303, 360, 370, 390, 408, 410, 415, 418, 428, 
460, 470, 498, Engineering 411, Robotics 301, or 302. 

Thermal Systems electives 
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 321, 360, 370, 391, 414, 416, 421, 460, 470, 
or 499. 

Technical Electives 
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 304, 305, 331, 360, 370, 460, 470, 
Engineering 301, 390, or 412. 

 
*Students who take Chemistry 111, 112, 113, and 114 are exempt from the Chemistry 105 
requirement and fulfill the Math/Science elective. 
 
**Students who complete Mathematics 213, 222, and 331 are exempt from the Engineering 274 
requirement. 
 
***A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, 
faculty-mentored research, and honors courses can be applied towards the Engineering Electives 
requirements. 
 
Courses that count in the Mechanical Engineering major quality point average 
(MQPA):  
 All courses with “MECE” and “ROBO” prefix; ELEE 210; ENGR 156, 301, 320, 390, 
392, and 402. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 



Mechanical Engineering / 229 
 

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (MECE) MAJOR  
FOUR-YEAR PLAN 

 1st 2nd    1st     2nd 
FRESHMAN YEAR Sem. Sem.       SOPHOMORE YEAR Sem.    Sem. 
Chemistry 105    4   - Mathematics 261-262  4  3 
Engineering 156    -   2 Mech. Engineering 201  3  - 
Mathematics 161-162    4   4 Mech. Engineering 210  -  3 
Mech. Engineering 107    2   - Mech. Engineering 211-212  3  3 
Mech. Engineering 109    2   - Mech. Engineering 214  -  3 
Mech. Engineering 120    -   3 Mech. Engineering 251-252  1  1  
Physics 101    -   4 Physics 102   4  -  
HUMA 102 - WRIT 101    3   3 SSFT course   2  -  
Physical Education    1   - Humanities 202  -  3 
  16 16    17  16 
JUNIOR YEAR   SENIOR YEAR 
Elec. Engineering 210    -   3 Engineering 402   -  1 
Engineering 274    3   - Mech. Engineering 401  3 - 
Math/Science Elective    3   - Mech. Engineering 451-452  1 3 
Mech. Engineering 311-312    3   3 Mech. Engineering Electives  9 4 
Mech. Engineering 316    -   3 Humanities 301-303  3 3 
Mech. Engineering 325-326    3   3 General Elective   -   4 
Mech. Engineering 351-352    1   1     16 15 
Social Science Course    -   3  
Humanities 200    3   - 
  16          16 

Course Requirements for a minor in Robotics (19-20 hours) 
  A minor in Robotics will consist of Robotics 301, 302; Engineering 301; a 3-4 credit 
robotics-related capstone project; and nine hours from Computer Science 445, Electrical 
Engineering 310, Engineering 411, Engineering 412, Mechanical Engineering 316, or 
Mechanical Engineering 410 or Engineering 390 Introduction to Mechatronics. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

ENGINEERING CORE COURSES (ENGR) 
ENGR 156. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING. Introduces students to the engineering 
profession and the design process. Course lectures and assignments include the design process; 
problem definition and solution; oral and written communications; group dynamics; public 
responsibility; current global engineering challenges; and engineering ethics. A group design project 
is required. Semester course, two hours. 
 
ENGR 274. MATHEMATICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING. A course for engineering and 
science majors covering selected topics in probability and statistics, linear algebra, discrete 
mathematics, and numerical methods as applied to the solution of problems in engineering and science. 
Students who receive credit for Mathematics 213, 222, and 331 may not receive credit for Engineering 
274. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162. Semester course, three hours. 
 
ENGR 301. ETHICS IN ENGINEERING AND ROBOTICS. This course investigates ethical 
decision-making from a Christian perspective as it applies to engineering and robotics. It includes an 
overview of approaches to ethical decision-making, as well as particular issues raised by the robotics 
field, such as robots making military decisions, privacy issues with in-home robots, issues with 
emotional bonds, etc. Semester course, one hour. 



230 / Grove City College 

ENGR 390. SPECIAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in the areas of new engineering 
development based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject matter varies each 
semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of registration.  
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
ENGR 402. ENGINEERING ECONOMY. Principles and methods for analyzing the economic 
feasibility of engineering projects including interest, depreciation, rate-of-return, economic life, 
replacement costs, and comparison of alternative designs. Aspects of this course will be involved in 
the final phase of Senior Capstone projects. Prerequisite: Mathematics 141 or 161. Corequisite: 
Mechanical Engineering 452, Electrical Engineering 452, or Robotics 452. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
ENGR 411. CONTROL SYSTEMS. A study of the design and analysis of feedback control systems 
using classical techniques. Topics include modeling of mechanical and electrical dynamic systems, a 
review of Laplace transform techniques, steady-state error, transient response, stability, root locus 
design methods, Bode analysis/stability margins, and Bode compensator design. Includes 
MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 210 or 
201; Mechanical Engineering 316 or Electrical Engineering 321; and Engineering 274, Mathematics 
214, or Mathematics 222.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGR 412. MODERN CONTROL THEORY. Analysis and design of feedback control systems 
using modern control modeling and design techniques. Topics include state space modeling of 
mechanical and electrical systems, design of state-space controllers and observers, Kalman filtering, 
and an introduction to advanced topics such as robust control, optimal control (LGR/LQG), and others. 
Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Engineering 411. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ENGR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING. An opportunity for junior or senior engineering 
majors to participate in an extended work experience (six months or more) under the supervision of an 
on-site manager and a department faculty member. Products of the internship will include an evaluation 
by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship experience, and a paper describing the experience 
and relating it to academic theory. This course may be repeated a maximum of three times. Prerequisite: 
Permission from the department chair. Semester course, one hour. 
 

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (MECE) 
MECE 107. ENGINEERING GRAPHICS. A study of the principles of engineering drawing, 
including detailed part drawings. Students will learn to read and create detailed technical drawings. 
Topics include orthographic and pictorial views, section views, and auxiliary views. Dimensioning and 
tolerancing in accordance with ANSI Y14.5, including geometric dimensioning and tolerancing is 
emphasized. Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
MECE 109. INTRO TO SOLID MODELING. An introduction to basic CAD modeling. Students 
will be introduced to mechanical engineering terminology and mechanical components such as screws, 
gears, shafts, etc. An introduction to CAD solid modeling with Creo, including basic part and assembly 
models is also included. A small design project will introduce CAD design tools, including additive 
manufacturing. Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
MECE 120. NUMERICAL COMPUTING FOR MECHANICAL ENGINEERS. This course 
introduces students to applied numerical computation, with an emphasis on solving typical mechanical 
engineering problems. Sequential logic programming is taught using MATLAB. Topics include array 
and scalar operators, program control elements, graphic and text I/O, internal and user-defined 
functions. Students are introduced to numerical methods such as root finding, solutions to systems of 
linear equations, linear regression, and numerical integration and differentiation. Corequisites: 
Mathematics 161 and Physics 101.  Semester course, three hours. 
 



Mechanical Engineering / 231 
 

MECE 201. FUNDAMENTALS OF MATERIALS SCIENCE. Models of crystalline and molecular 
structures are presented to explain the diverse properties of metallic; polymeric and ceramic materials; 
including atomic bonding and crystal structure; elastic and plastic deformation; phase of equilibria and 
transformation; thermal processing; and corrosion. Prerequisite: Chemistry 105.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 210. DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING. Introduction to manufacturing processes, 
including part characteristics, economic production quantities, materials, and design 
recommendations. Emphasis is placed on process and material selection and design for 
manufacturability. The course includes plant tours. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 107, 109, 
and 201. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 211. MECHANICS I. Static equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies; analysis of structures, 
trusses, and cables; friction; centroids and moments of inertia; methods of virtual work; and energy are 
addressed. Engineering applications are also incorporated. Prerequisites: Mathematics 162, 
Mechanical Engineering 120, and Physics 101. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 212. MECHANICS II. A study of rectilinear and curvilinear motion of particles and rigid 
bodies; kinetics of particles and rigid bodies; relative motion, work, and energy; impulse and 
momentum are taught along with engineering applications. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 211.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 214. THERMODYNAMICS. The study of the fundamental principles and some 
applications of classical thermodynamics. Topics include properties of pure substances; heat, work, 
and mass transfer; first law of thermodynamics; second law of thermodynamics; entropy; gas power 
cycles; vapor power cycles; and refrigeration cycles. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 251. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS LABORATORY I. A lab course designed to introduce 
students to engineering practices including dimensioning, gaging and measuring, machining 
operations, manufacturing processes, and engineering standards for fasteners, threads, etc. Hands-on 
application will be taught through an individual project involving machining, fabrication, and 
assembly. Materials testing laboratories are also part of this course. Mechanical Engineering 251 is 
designed to fulfill the requirements for an Information Literacy (IL) course in the Mechanical 
Engineering major. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing in mechanical engineering.  
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
MECE 252. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS LABORATORY II. A lab course designed to introduce 
students to engineering experimental techniques, including planning, controls, basic instrumentation, 
and basic data analysis. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing in mechanical engineering and Mechanical 
Engineering 251. Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
MECE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in mechanical 
engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, 
and honors courses can be applied towards one of the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal 
Systems, or Technical Electives. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mechanical engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty 
sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent 
research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of the following: Mechanical Systems, 
Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 303. COMPUTER-AIDED MANUFACTURING. Introduction to computer-aided 
manufacturing using Creo CAD/CAM software. Students will learn to program CNC machine tools, 
including three axis mills, lathes, and wire EDM machines, as well as basic pattern and mold design 



232 / Grove City College 

for sand casting, injection molding, and vacuum forming. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 107 
and 109. January intersession only, three hours. 
 
MECE 304. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS. Design of experiments for engineering design 
optimization and analysis.  An introduction to the statistically designed experimental techniques 
commonly used by engineers for design and process optimization, including ANOVA, factorial, CCD, 
Taguchi, and I-optimal designs.  Prerequisite:  Junior status or permission of instructor.   
 Spring semester, one hour. 
 
MECE 305. INTRODUCTION TO LABVIEW. Introduction to LabVIEW.  Presents the 
fundamentals of the LabVIEW graphical programming environment.  This visual programming 
language is from National Instruments and is commonly used for data acquisition, instrument control, 
and industrial automation.  Students will gain a basic understanding of LabVIEW programming 
practices and will develop LabVIEW applications for data acquisition, data analysis, and real-time 
control.  Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 120 or permission of instructor.    
 Spring semester, one hour. 
 
MECE 311. MECHANICS OF MATERIALS. Fundamentals of mechanics of materials, including 
stress and strain; axial loading; Hooke's Law and Poisson's ratio; torsion; bending; transverse loading; 
stress and strain transformations; beam analysis; and buckling. Prerequisites: Mathematics 262 and 
Mechanical Engineering 210 and 212. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 312. STRESS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF MACHINE COMPONENTS. Application 
of stress analysis to static, fatigue, and surface fatigue failures. Design of shafts, including limits and 
fits and bearing selection. Design and selection of machine elements such as screws, bolted joints, 
springs, gears, brakes, etc. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 311.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 316. SYSTEM DYNAMICS. Modeling and analysis of dynamic systems consisting of 
mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical elements. Development of system models using transfer 
functions, block diagrams, and state variable methods. System analysis in the time and frequency 
domains. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations. Prerequisites: Mathematics 262 and Mechanical 
Engineering 212; or Physics 303 and either Mechanical Engineering 120 or Computer Science 141.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 321. ADVANCED THERMODYNAMICS. Application of thermodynamic principles. 
Topics include reviewing equations of state, properties, conservation of mass, conservation of energy, 
second law of thermodynamics, and cycles; exergy; property relationships; gas and gas-vapor 
mixtures; air conditioning; chemical reactions; chemical and phase equilibrium; and compressible-
fluid flow. Prerequisite: Mathematics 261 and Mechanical Engineering 214. 
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 325. FLUID MECHANICS. The study of steady and unsteady flow of primarily 
incompressible fluids; the application of the conservation laws of mass, momentum, and energy to 
fluid systems; the control volume approach to distributed systems; and the application of experimental 
techniques to problems. Prerequisites: Mathematics 261, 262; and Mechanical Engineering 211 or 
Physics 303 (for majors) or Physics 121 (for non-majors). Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 326. HEAT TRANSFER. The fundamentals of heat transfer by conduction, convection, and 
radiation; application to practical heat transfer devices; engineering analysis of heat exchangers; and 
design problems solved by analytical, numerical, and computer methods. Prerequisites: Mechanical 
Engineering 214, Physics 340, or Chemistry 346; and Mechanical Engineering 325. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 331. ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT & CROSS-CULTURAL COMMUNICATION. 
Introduction to the tools needed to manage technical projects in an international setting including (1) 
cross-cultural communication/management, with a special emphasis on French vs. U.S. 



Mechanical Engineering / 233 
 

language/culture, and (2) selected introductory engineering management and design process topics. 
Classroom lectures and case studies are supplemented with cultural field trips and interaction with 
French engineering students taking this class. Open to all GCC students studying in France; facilitated 
by the GCC European Study Center (ESC) and the University of Nantes (ONIRIS) in Nantes, France. 
This course can be used to satisfy a portion of the mechanical systems or thermal systems elective 
requirements in Mechanical Engineering. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 351. INSTRUMENTATION LABORATORY. A lab course that reinforces the lab 
techniques introduced in Mechanical Engineering 251-252. Experiments chosen from strain analysis, 
first and second order systems, and vibration analysis. Mechanical Engineering 351 is designed to 
fulfill the requirements for a Writing Intensive (WI) course in the Mechanical Engineering major. 
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 252. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 311. 
 Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
MECE 352. THERMAL/FLUIDS LABORATORY. A lab course that reinforces the lab techniques 
introduced in Mechanical Engineering 251-252. Experiments chosen from thermodynamics, fluid 
mechanics, and heat transfer. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326.  
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
MECE 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in mechanical 
engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, and honors 
courses can be applied towards one of the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or 
Technical Electives. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mechanical engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, 
and honors courses can be applied towards the Mechanical Engineering elective requirements. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 390. SPECIAL MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in mechanical 
engineering based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject matter varies each semester 
with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of registration. This course can be used to 
satisfy a portion of the mechanical systems elective requirements in Mechanical Engineering.
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
MECE 391. SPECIAL MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in mechanical 
engineering based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject matter varies each semester 
with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of registration. This course can be used to 
satisfy a portion of the thermal systems elective requirements in Mechanical Engineering.  
 Semester course, one, two, three or four hours. 
 
MECE 401. CAPSTONE DESIGN I. Completion of the senior design project. A study of the 
principles and methods of designing mechanical engineering systems in today’s society, including the 
design process; decision making in design; engineering economics; analysis and verification of 
performance; and environmental impact. Prerequisite: Senior standing in mechanical engineering. 
Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 451. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 408. MECHANICAL VIBRATIONS. A study of the dynamic response of lumped parameter 
systems with one and two degrees of freedom subjected to periodic and non-periodic excitation; 
applications to the control of undesirable vibrations in machines; theory of seismic instruments; and 
an introduction to distributed parameter systems. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 311 and 316.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 410. KINEMATICS AND DYNAMICS OF MACHINERY. Modeling, analysis, and design 
of linkages, cams, and gear trains, including machine dynamics. Introduction to dynamic systems 



234 / Grove City College 

modeling using computer-aided analysis, including Creo. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 311.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 414. PRINCIPLES OF HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING. 
Analysis and design of components and systems used to condition air in buildings. Topics include air-
conditioning systems, psychrometrics, conditioning processes, indoor air quality, heat transfer, solar 
radiation, heating loads, cooling loads, annual energy usage, pumps and piping, fans and ducts, and 
refrigeration equipment. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 415. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS. A study of the finite element method and its 
application to mechanical engineering problems. Topics include basic concepts; stiffness matrices; 
truss structures; flexure elements; method of weighted residuals; interpolation functions; and 
applications to heat transfer, fluid mechanics, solid mechanics, and structural dynamics. Prerequisites: 
Engineering 274, Mechanical Engineering 312 and 326. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 416. SURVEY OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS. A survey of the technical and 
social aspects of alternative and renewable energy systems. Topics include hydropower, wind energy, 
solar power, biomass, fuel cells and hydrogen economy, nuclear power, and geothermal and ocean 
energy. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 418. HUMAN-POWERED VEHICLE DESIGN. Computer-aided modeling, analysis, and 
design of human-powered vehicles for land, water, and air. Includes analysis of vehicle dynamics and 
handling, performance predictions, and CAD-based design tools integrating dynamic models with 
Creo models. Two lectures and one lab per week. Corequisites: Mechanical Engineering 311 and 325.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MECE 421. APPLIED FLUID MECHANICS. Advanced treatment and application of the equations 
and empirical data that describe fluid phenomena in both internal and external fluid systems. 
Introduction to techniques important to research and design in fluid applications, specifically 
computational and experimental fluid dynamics. Among the topics covered are potential flow, added 
mass, boundary layer flow, lubrication theory and bearings, turbomachinery, turbulence, non-
Newtonian fluids, compressible flow, and biofluid dynamics. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 
326. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 428. BIOMECHANICS. The course will explore the key topics within the contemporary field 
of biomechanics—the application of mechanics to biological systems—with the goal of preparing 
students for further work in cutting-edge fields such as biomedical engineering, novel propulsion 
systems, and other biologically-inspired engineering. Among the topics covered are biomaterials, 
mechanical properties of biological structures, biomimetic robotics, terrestrial locomotion, swimming, 
flying, prosthetics, external and internal fluid flows, efficiency, blood flow, experimental techniques, 
and flow visualization. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 311 and 325, or Physics 232, or 
Mathematics 161 and Physics 121 and Biology 102.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY I. An advanced lab course where students learn 
techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project. Written reports and 
oral presentations are required. Prerequisites: Senior standing in engineering or permission of 
instructor. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
MECE 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY II. An advanced lab course requiring student 
teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations are required. 
Mechanical Engineering 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive (SI) course 
in the Mechanical Engineering major. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering and one of 
Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, or Robotics 451. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
MECE 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in mechanical 
engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, and honors 



Mechanical Engineering / 235 
 

courses can be applied towards one of the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or 
Technical Electives. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
mechanical engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor 
are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, 
and honors courses can be applied towards one of the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal 
Systems, or Technical Electives. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 498. HONORS IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING. Seniors (and in some instances, 
juniors) who have shown special aptitude in mechanical engineering may, with consent of the 
department, undertake special research and design problems. This course may be used to satisfy a 
portion of the mechanical systems elective requirements in Mechanical Engineering. A combined total 
of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, and honors courses can be 
applied towards the Mechanical Engineering elective requirements. Cannot be repeated for more than 
a total of three credit hours. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MECE 499. HONORS IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING. Seniors (and in some instances, 
juniors) who have shown special aptitude in mechanical engineering may, with consent of the 
department, undertake special research and design problems. This course may be used to satisfy a 
portion of the thermal systems elective requirements in Mechanical Engineering. A combined total of 
up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research, and honors courses can be applied 
towards the Mechanical Engineering elective requirements. Cannot be repeated for more than a total 
of three credit hours. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

ROBOTICS (ROBO) 
ROBO 301. INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS. Presents the fundamentals of robot mechanisms, kinematics, 
dynamics, and controls. Topics include forward and inverse kinematics, differential motion and 
velocities, dynamics and force control, path and trajectory planning, actuators and drive systems, and 
sensors used in robotic systems. The basics of robotic control systems are briefly presented. The use 
of vision systems in robotics is introduced. Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Electrical 
Engineering 321 or Mechanical Engineering 316, robotics minor, or permission of instructor. 
  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ROBO 302. MOBILE ROBOTS. An introduction to the basic principles of mobile robots, including 
mechanical, sensory, and cognitive systems necessary for successful operation. Topics will include 
hardware, locomotion, sensors, control schemes, localization, and navigation. Hands-on lab 
experiences with real robots and a final project supplement lecture material. Two lectures and one lab 
per week. Prerequisites: Physics 101; Mathematics 261; and Engineering 274 or Mathematics 214.
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ROBO 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT I. An advanced lab course where students learn 
techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project. Written reports and 
oral presentations are required. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering or permission of the 
instructor. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
ROBO 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT II. An advanced lab course requiring student teams 
to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations are required. Robotics 
452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the Speaking Intensive (SI) course in the Electrical and 
Computer Engineering or Mechanical Engineering major. Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering 
and one of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, or Robotics 451. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
 
 



236 / Grove City College 

DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES 
Dr. Madsen, Chair; Ms. Carruth, Dr. Jackanich, Dr. Killam, Dr. Knupp.  
 
Language Placement Guidelines 
 Students who have had prior exposure to a language but have not taken an AP exam or 
received college credit in the language must take the Foreign Language Placement Exam 
before registering for their first modern languages course at Grove City College. This 
includes incoming freshmen, transfer students, and current students. 
 Students may take the placement exam any time during the spring or summer in 
anticipation of fall registration or during the fall or winter in anticipation of spring 
registration. Scores will remain valid for six months. After initial placement, a student’s 
progression into advanced courses will be determined by successful completion of 
prerequisites. 
 Students should only take the exam once within a six-month period unless given 
permission to repeat the exam by the department.  They are expected to adhere to Grove 
City College’s Academic Integrity Policy. That is, the work should be the student’s own 
and should not contain that which has been knowingly obtained from another. The use of 
notes, dictionaries, translating tools, textbooks, and all other forms of assistance during the 
placement test are prohibited. 
 If it becomes apparent that a student in his/her first term of study of a language at Grove 
City College has been placed in a class that is inappropriate for his/her abilities, he/she may 
be placed back or advanced at the option of the Department. This may be done no later than 
the end of the third week of classes. Note: A student may repeat a course in which he/she 
previously earned a grade of ‘C-’ or lower. A student who passes a course with a ‘C’ grade 
or higher may not later repeat the same class for credit or audit unless the course is 
designated as repeatable for multiple credits. 
 
 Note: Language study is progressive and sequential. For example, 101 must be 
followed by 102, 102 by 201, and 201 by 202. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in French—30 hours 

French Core Requirements (30 hours): 
French 201 and 202, or two 300-level French electives (excluding French 362); 
French 301; 305 or 340; French 307; 308; two French literature courses; and two 
French electives (six hours) at the 300-level (excluding French 362). 

 
Courses that count in the French major quality point average (MQPA): 

All courses with “FREN” prefix, excluding FREN 101 and FREN 102. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in French and K-12 Education 
Certification—75 hours 

French Core Requirements (32 hours): 
French 201 and 202, or two 300-level French electives; French 301; 305 or 340; 
French 307; 308; 362; two French literature courses; and two French electives (six 
hours) at the 300-level. 

 Education Requirements (43 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 307, 316, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 



Modern Languages / 237 
 

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Spanish—33 hours 
Spanish Language Core Requirements (18 hours): 

Spanish 201 and 202, or two 300-level Spanish electives (excluding Spanish 362); 
Spanish 301, 303, 305, and 306. 

Literature and Culture Core Requirements (9 hours): 
Spanish 344; one course from Spanish 320, 330, or 331; and one course from Spanish 
321, 325, 328. 

Spanish Electives (6 hours): 
Any two 300- or 400-level Spanish courses (excluding Spanish 362). 

 
Courses that count in the Spanish major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “SPAN” prefix, excluding SPAN 101, 102, 201 and 202. A minimum 
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Spanish and K-12 Education 
Certification—78 hours 

Spanish Language Core Requirements (20 hours): 
Spanish 201 and 202, or two 300-level Spanish electives; Spanish 301, 303, 305, 
306, and 362. 

Literature and Culture Core Requirements (9 hours): 
Spanish 344; one course from Spanish 320, 330, or 331; and one course from Spanish 
321, 325, 328. 

Spanish Electives (6 hours): 
Any two 300- or 400-level Spanish courses. 

 Education Requirements (43 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 307, 316, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 
 

International Business Major 
 This program leads to a Bachelor of Science degree, combining business and modern 
language studies. Consult the Department of Management and Marketing for program 
requirements. 
 
Classical Languages 
 Consult the Department of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy for Biblical 
Hebrew, New Testament Greek, and Latin course descriptions as well as the requirements 
for the Classical Studies minor. 
 
Writing Intensive/Speaking Intensive/Information Literacy Studies 
 The Department of Modern Languages stresses the acquisition of skills in speaking, 
writing, and analysis/research. The following courses are designated as Writing Intensive 
(WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL): French 307 (WI); French 305, 
340 (SI); French 320, 32l, 325, 326, 331, 332 (IL) for the French major; and Spanish 303 
(SI); Spanish 320, 321, 325, 328, 330, 331, 333 (WI) and (IL) for the Spanish major. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in French (18 hours) 
 A minor in French will consist of 18 hours of French courses beyond French 101 and 
102, excluding French 362. 
 



238 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for a minor in International Studies (24 hours) 
 The International Studies Minor contributes to both the professional development and 
intellectual enrichment of undergraduate students at Grove City College, enabling them to 
develop a broad understanding of the rapidly changing global environment for which they 
will be equipped to function during their professional careers. This minor is 
interdisciplinary, comprised of a small cluster of courses in foreign language and culture, 
with a contemporary focus. The International Studies Minor provides for mid-level 
competency in a modern language other than the student’s native tongue, broad knowledge 
of other cultures, and understanding of the complexity and interconnectedness of the modern 
world. 

General Requirements: 
Students must possess modern language competency as demonstrated by completing 
at least the second-year course sequence (201-202) or equivalent in a widely spoken 
modern language other than the student’s native language. Students must also 
complete an approved international academic experience (Study Abroad) at the 
college level for a semester or year, or three credits of international internship 
experience. 

Core Requirements (6 hours): 
Two courses from: Communication Arts 225, Global Studies 300, Psychology 200, 
or Sociology 103. 

Elective Requirements (15 hours): 
Five courses from the following, with no more than three courses from any one of 
the four emphases areas. 

International Politics, History, Religion 
History 141, 212, 224, 231, 263, 265; Political Science 333, 341, 342, 344; or 
Religion 248. 

Global Economies 
Economics 202, 206; International Business 205, 416, 417, or 445. 

Global Society & Culture 
French 305, 301, 321, 326, 340; Global Studies 310; Sociology 241, 375; 
Spanish 320, 333; Spanish 322 or 323; or Spanish 326 or 327. 

International Art, Music, English 
English 205, 206, 250, 324, 325; or Music 330. 

Global Capstone (3 credits): 
All students are required to complete a capstone experience which involves enrolling 
in Internship, Independent Research, or Honors for 3 credits. The exact parameters 
of this capstone requirement are determined in consultation with the student and their 
capstone advisor. 
 
The capstone project must synthesize the student's course of study by incorporating 
at least two of the four emphases in design and/or content and must demonstrate their 
understanding of how to communicate their research in a global context to an 
audience of their own choosing. Examples may include an international internship, 
service-learning program, or field work that results in a substantive paper, grant, or 
project. The following courses satisfy this requirement: Communication Arts 470 
Independent Research; 480 Internship; or 499 Honors in Communication. If the 
student chooses the internship option, this must be a different internship from the 
one conducted for the general requirements. 

 
 
 



Modern Languages / 239 
 

Course Requirements for a minor in Spanish (18 hours) 
 A minor in Spanish will consist of 18 hours of Spanish courses beyond Spanish 201 
and 202, including Spanish 301; Spanish 303; Spanish 305; one Spanish literature and 
culture course (Spanish 320, 330, or 331); one Latin American literature and culture course 
(Spanish 321, 325, or 328); and three hours of 300 or 400-level Spanish electives, excluding 
Spanish 362. 

 
Course Requirements for a minor in Spanish for the Professions (18 hours) 

A minor in Spanish for the Professions will consist of 18 hours of Spanish courses 
beyond Spanish 201 and 202, including Spanish 301, 303, 306, and 315; Spanish 316 or 
317; and one literature and culture course (Spanish 320, 321, 325, 328, 330, or 331).  

 
Study Abroad 
 Study abroad is strongly encouraged for language majors. Selection of a program and 
of specific courses takes place in consultation with the Office of Global Programs, the Chair 
of the Department of Modern Languages, individual modern language advisors, and the 
Registrar. Detailed information about the Grove City College Study Abroad program is 
available by accessing www.gcc.edu/academics/oie. Language majors seeking assistance 
regarding program options, transfer of credits, application forms, deadlines, letters of 
recommendation, and other matters related to study abroad may contact the Modern 
Languages Department Chair.  
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

FRENCH (FREN) 
FREN 101. ELEMENTARY FRENCH I. The first of a two-semester elementary sequence that 
moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading, writing, listening, 
speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking world. Intended for students 
with little or no prior exposure to the French language, this course emphasizes successful 
communication in real-life situations and a basic understanding of the main elements of French 
grammar. Students who have previously studied French must take the placement exam before enrolling 
in French 101.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 102. ELEMENTARY FRENCH II. The second of a two-semester elementary sequence that 
moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading, writing, listening, 
speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking world. Prerequisite: French 
101 or placement exam. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 201. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I. The first of a two-semester intermediate sequence that 
moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading, writing, listening, 
speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking world. Students progress from 
formulas and single sentence utterances to paragraph-length discourse. Prerequisite: French 102 or 
placement exam. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 202. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II. The second of a two-semester intermediate sequence 
that moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading, writing, listening, 
speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking world. Students develop 
increasing communicative sophistication. Prerequisite: French 201 or placement exam.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
 



240 / Grove City College 

FREN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
FREN 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
French. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
FREN 301. UNDERSTANDING FRANCE AND THE FRENCH. Students gain insight into 
modern day France and her people through an understanding of her recent history, institutions, 
conventions, and cultural products. A variety of sources (articles, films, essays, etc.) will facilitate 
discussion of key aspects of French society. Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam. 

Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 305. TOPICS IN FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES. Students hone skills of 
description, narration, and evaluation through the observation and discussion of various cultural 
elements of the French-speaking world. Different topics will be studied in different semesters and may 
include gastronomy, fashion, sports, music, places (such as Paris), or major cultural figures. This 
course fulfills the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for the French major and may be repeated for 
credit provided the topic is different. Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam. 
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 307. FRENCH COMPOSITION AND STYLE. The purpose of this course is to refine 
students’ writing ability in French. Through a variety of assignments arranged around specific genres 
(e.g. a movie review, a persuasive essay, a job cover letter, etc.), students will hone their ability to 
communicate clearly and with greater sophistication. To prepare for writing their own compositions, 
students will read texts in the target genres in order to identify effective argumentation, style, and tone. 
In addition to covering more advanced skills, the course will review key grammatical structures 
according to the needs of the class. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) requirement for the 
French major. Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 308. APPLIED PHONETICS. Offering both a theoretical and practical approach to the French 
phonetic system, this course guides students through the sounds and prosody of French as contrasted 
with English with the help of the International Phonetic Alphabet. In addition to learning to identify 
and transcribe all French phonemes, students will improve their own pronunciation and intonation via 
extensive oral practice and individualized feedback. Required of French majors and those desiring 
teacher certification in French. Prerequisites: French 202 or placement exam. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 315. BUSINESS FRENCH. Through this course, students acquire the linguistic skills and 
cultural information they need to prepare for the Chambre de commerce et d’industrie de Paris 
examinations. They familiarize themselves with business practices of the Francophone world. They 
are exposed to key French business topics and to essential career practices, as well as to cultural 
concepts particular to French businesses. Areas of concentration are: 1. la correspondance; 2. la micro-
informatique, Internet, le courrier électronique; 3. la recherche d’un emploi; 4. la typologie des 
entreprises; 5. l’organisation des enterprises; 6. le marketing; 7. la banque et les moyens de paiement; 
8. les transports et le commerce international. Prerequisite: French 300-level course. 
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
FREN 320. MEDIEVAL AND EARLY MODERN FRENCH LITERATURE. A survey of French 
literature from its beginnings in the eleventh century to the seventeenth century. Through fiction, 
poetry, essays, treatises, emblems, and images, this course explores the relationships among literary 
creation, political events, religious movements, artistic innovations, and scientific discoveries. 
Readings may include La Vie de Saint Alexis, The Song of Roland, Marguerite de Navarre, Rabelais, 
Ronsard, Montaigne, Descartes, Pascal, and Madame de Lafayette. This course fulfills the Information 
Literacy (IL) requirement for the French major. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 



Modern Languages / 241 
 

FREN 321. 18th THROUGH 21st CENTURY FRENCH LITERATURE. An introduction to French 
literary development from the eighteenth to the twenty-first century. From Louis XIV’s absolute 
monarchy through the French Revolution to two World Wars and decolonization, these centuries 
provoked rich and diverse literary production, often as a means of social and political engagement. 
Authors may include Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, Stendhal, Hugo, Balzac, Flaubert, Zola, Modiano, 
Duras, Queneau, Condé, Ben Jelloun, Nothomb, etc. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by 
permission. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
FREN 325. FRENCH THEATRE. A course designed to give students an overview of the history and 
evolution of theater in the French-speaking world. Readings may include Molière, Corneille, Racine, 
Beaumarchais, Hugo, Sartre, Ionesco, Beckett, and Césaire. This course fulfills the Information 
Literacy (IL) requirement for the French major. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
FREN 326. LE CINÉMA PAR LA CONVERSATION. This course begins with analyses, 
commentaries, and discussions of French films with which spectators in non-francophone countries 
are most likely to be familiar. Progressively, the emphasis shifts to films of the Occupation (1940-
1944) and of the Nouvelle Vague (the 1960s), films which have been held significant in aesthetic, 
social, or moral terms by prominent critics and historians of French cinema. The materials and 
strategies used are meant to stimulate interest in the target language, to bridge the gap between “skill” 
and creative courses, and to develop the language proficiency of advanced students, as well as their 
ability to express themselves creatively in French. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) 
requirement for the French major. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
FREN 331. POETRY. The goal of this course is to enable students to express themselves with 
increased sophistication and to practice “explication de textes”, this staple of French classical 
education. Students will study the biographies and also selected texts by nineteenth- and twentieth- 
century poets from France and the francophone world: Hugo, Nerval, Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Verlaine, 
Rimbaud, Valéry, Senghor, and Césaire. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement 
for the French major. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
FREN 332. CARIBBEAN AND AFRICAN LITERATURE IN FRENCH. The goal of this course 
is to familiarize students with the vibrant literary scene in French-speaking regions outside of Europe, 
with an emphasis on the Caribbean, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. The course may include 
novels, essays, or short stories by authors such as Suzanne Dracius (Martinique), Patrick Chamoiseau 
(Martinique), Albert Memmi (Tunisia), Assia Djebar (Algeria), Alain Mabanckou (Republic of 
Congo), and Leonora Miano (Cameroon). This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) 
requirement for the French major. Prerequisite: French 300-level course, or by permission. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 340. MOMENTS IN FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE HISTORY. Through the study of 
historical events and developments in the French-speaking world, students expand on the skills of 
description and narration acquired in French 305 and move toward more sophisticated modes of 
discourse, such as discussing abstract ideas, constructing arguments, and hypothesizing. Different 
topics will be studied in different semesters and may include the beginnings of the French language, 
philosophical ideas (e.g. Enlightenment, existentialism), Medieval culture, the Renaissance, Louis XIV 
and Versailles, French colonization and its aftermath, France in WWII, etc. This course fulfills the 
Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for the French major and may be repeated for credit provided the 
topic is different. Prerequisites: French 300-level course, or by permission.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
FREN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  

Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



242 / Grove City College 

FREN 362. ASPECTS OF LANGUAGE LEARNING. A course designed to provide opportunities 
to teach various grammar aspects of the French language, and to examine and implement a variety of 
technical aspects and resources in the foreign language curriculum in preparation for student teaching. 
Teacher candidates will regularly reflect on their teaching experiences and will develop a portfolio of 
materials representing their teaching in the target language. Required of all students desiring teacher 
certification in a foreign language. Spring semester of the sophomore year, two hours. 
 
FREN 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
French. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
FREN 390. STUDIES IN FRENCH. Readings and discussion of topics in literature or language. 
Subject matter varies. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
FREN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
FREN 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
French. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

SPANISH (SPAN) 
SPAN 101. ELEMENTARY SPANISH I. This course is intended for students with no previous study 
of Spanish or those who have had minimal exposure to the language. An introduction to Spanish, 
stressing the spoken language and giving practice in grammar, reading, writing, and developing an 
awareness of culture. Students who have previously studies Spanish must take the placement exam 
before enrolling in Spanish 101. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 102. ELEMENTARY SPANISH II. Continuation of Spanish 101. Further development of 
basic communication skills including listening, speaking, reading, writing, and developing an 
awareness of culture. Prerequisite: Spanish 101 or placement exam.  
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 201. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I. This course is appropriate for students who have 
completed Spanish 101 and 102. A review of elementary Spanish and an intensive study of grammar 
and vocabulary in oral and written practice, readings from selected texts, and the development of 
cultural awareness. Prerequisite: Spanish 102 or placement exam. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 202. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II. Continuation of Spanish 201. The intensive study of 
grammar and vocabulary in oral and written practice, readings from selected texts, and the 
development of cultural awareness. Further development of basic communication skills in listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing. Prerequisite: Spanish 201 or placement exam. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Spanish. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 300. TOPICS IN CONTEMPORARY CULTURE. This course allows in-depth learning of 
topics of key importance in the Hispanic world with a particular emphasis on contemporary life. 
Subject matter will vary and may include urbanism, sports, major cultural figures, history, politics, 



Modern Languages / 243 
 

social movements, and religion and will be approached through film, media, literature, music, and 
visual arts. This course may be repeated for credit provided the topic is different. Prerequisite: Spanish 
295 or 301. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
SPAN 301. INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE. Introduction to techniques of literary analysis 
and study of representative works by major authors of the Spanish-speaking world. Prerequisite: 
Spanish 202 or placement exam. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 303. CONVERSATION. This course examines contemporary cultural and social trends in 
Spain, the United States, and Latin America and trains students in interpersonal and presentational 
communication with a professional focus while offering a review of key grammatical structures. This 
course fulfills the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the Spanish major. Required of all Spanish 
majors, minors, and those desiring teacher certification in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 202. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 305. APPLIED PHONETICS. This course is a systematic examination of how the sounds of 
Spanish are produced. By learning and applying phonetic and phonological principles, this course is 
intended to help students improve their pronunciation. It also introduces the linguistic variation of 
Spanish in Spain, the United States, and Latin America. Students learn to identify and comprehend the 
dialects of Spanish and will be trained in using this skill in professional settings. Required of all 
Spanish majors and those desiring teacher certification in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 202. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 306. ADVANCED COMMUNICATION. This class offers an engaging encounter with 
advanced Spanish grammar by creating real-life scenarios and situations where students can apply 
what they learn. Students practice how to target their discourse to specific audiences using particular 
formats, for instance, presentations, interviews, formal and informal letters, emails, and other academic 
and professional reports. Required of all Spanish majors and of those desiring teacher certification in 
Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 202. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 315. PROFESSIONAL SPANISH. This course focuses on the evolution and current state of 
fields such as business, healthcare, translation, and media in Spain, the United States, and Latin 
America. The course will study historical and legal contexts, offer in-depth learning and practice of 
specific vocabulary and structures relevant to those fields, and develop cultural competency applicable 
to professional situations. This course also provides an opportunity for students to create a portfolio of 
documents in Spanish that may be used in a job search and, when possible, the completion of an applied 
learning project. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
SPAN 316. BUSINESS CULTURE IN THE HISPANIC WORLD. This course offers an overview 
of the process of industrialization and the evolution of the markets of goods and services in Latin 
America. Students also learn about salaries, labor contracts, and important cases involving business 
ethics. The course concludes with a study of the rise of Hispanic global brands and their impact in 
today’s economy. Students read biographies, articles and short stories, and examine different types of 
media. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 317. SPACE AND URBAN DESIGN IN LATIN AMERICA. In the Latin American plaza, 
many different conceptions of how public space is defined and utilized converge, from the 
Mesopotamian boulevard to the markets, teocallis, and kanchas of the indigenous civilizations of the 
New World. Through a journey that highlights the key ideas and moments of the history of public 
space, this class examines the creation of the plaza in Latin America and invites students to make 
connections with the evolution of Main Street in the United States. Students also explore questions 
relative to the future of public areas and how redevelopment efforts may affect culture and society in 
general. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 319. INTRODUCTION TO SPANISH CIVILIZATION. A study of Spanish history and 
civilization from pre-Roman times to the present. Through readings, videos, discussions and 



244 / Grove City College 

presentations, students explore the social, political, economic and cultural developments of Spain and 
its people. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. Offered infrequently, three hours. 
 
SPAN 320. CONTEMPORARY SPAIN. A study of the events and ideas which have shaped Spain 
with an emphasis on literary works and authors, cultural achievements and traditions, and the evolution 
of socioeconomic and political structures from the 20th century to the present. Through readings, 
videos, discussions and presentations, students will develop an understanding of how Spain's rich 
history contributes to the daily life of contemporary Spain (politics, religion, family, social issues and 
other current topics) and influences the ways in which Spaniards view themselves and the world. 
Students will read online Spanish news sources regularly. This course fulfills the Information Literacy 
(IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 321. FOUNDATIONS OF LATIN AMERICAN SOCIETIES. An exploration of the 
civilization, culture, literature, and artistic forms of pre-Columbian societies and the changes, 
challenges, and opportunities brought by the processes of conquest and colonization. Students read 
firsthand accounts and chronicles of this period as well as the questions and objections raised by 
members of the Church to how colonization was being implemented. The course examines the 
contributions of the African populations to Latin American societies and concludes with a study of the 
Baroque period, including architecture, poetry, and painting. This course fulfills the Information 
Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level 
Spanish course. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 322. LATIN AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND CULTURE I. A survey of the twenty-one 
Latin American republics, their history and civilization, people and society, arts and letters, customs, 
geography, and cultural accomplishments. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301. 
 Offered infrequently, three hours. 
 
SPAN 323. LATIN AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND CULTURE II. A cultural understanding 
of Latin America including identity issues, "mestizaje”, socio-political characteristics, and patterns of 
thought and expression in language, literature, philosophy, and art. The course also examines the 
effects of the Spanish conquest upon the development of Latin American society. It is not necessary to 
take Spanish 322 before Spanish 323. Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301.  
 Offered infrequently, three hours. 
 
SPAN 325. INDEPENDENCE AND NATIONAL IDENTITIES IN LATIN AMERICA. A study 
of the situation of the Spanish colonies in the 18th century and its most recognized cultural productions. 
This course explores the causes and effects of independence, the power struggles that ensued after the 
foundation of the Latin American nations, and the role played by foreign powers in the establishment 
of national identities during the end of the 19th century. Students read travel accounts, chronicles of 
everyday life, manifestos, and the foundational narratives of the young republics, including novels and 
poetry. The course concludes with the social and aesthetic conditions that produced Modernismo, one 
of Latin America’s most recognized artistic periods. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) 
and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course 
beyond 301. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 326. TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE. A study of the literature of Latin 
America from the pre-Columbian era to the beginning of the 20th century. Prerequisite: 300-level 
Spanish course beyond 301. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 327. CONTEMPORARY LATIN AMERICAN AUTHORS. A survey with readings from 
representative works of the most important 20th century authors in Latin American and Mexican-
American (Chicano) literature. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course beyond 301.  
 Offered infrequently, three hours. 
 
SPAN 328. PEACE AND RECONCILIATION IN LATIN AMERICA. An exploration of the most 
representative poetry, essays, film, short stories, art, and fiction of the 20th century in Latin America. 



Modern Languages / 245 
 

The course investigates the main causes and effects of civil conflict in this geographical area and 
introduces students to the reconciliation and peace processes that took place during the end of the last 
century. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for 
the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course beyond 301.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.  
 
SPAN 330. MEDIEVAL AND GOLDEN AGE SPAIN. A study of representative authors and works 
of the Middle Ages, Renaissance, and Golden Age. This course explores the development of Spanish 
poetry, narrative, and theater in its historical and cultural contexts. Readings may include the Cantar 
de Mio Cid, El Conde Lucanor, El Libro de Buen Amor, Jorge Manrique, Garcilaso de la Vega, Fray 
Luis de León, San Juan de la Cruz, El Quijote, Lope de Vega, etc. This course fulfills the Information 
Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level 
Spanish course beyond 301.  Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
SPAN 331. THE SPANISH ENLIGHTENMENT AND ITS AFTERMATH. A study of Spanish 
Romanticism, Realism, and Generation of ’98 with readings from authors such as Espronceda, Zorrilla, 
Bécquer, Rosalía de Castro, Galdós, Pardo Bazán, Blasco Ibáñez, Unamuno, and Baroja. Nineteenth-
century Spain is characterized by enormous political and social instability. This course explores how 
increasing tensions between las dos Españas, as well as other cultural developments inspired 
generations of authors. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) 
requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course beyond 301. 
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
SPAN 333. CONTEMPORARY SPANISH AUTHORS. A survey with readings from representative 
authors and works of the 20th and 21st centuries. The literary works of contemporary Spain provide 
readers with a uniquely discerning view of Spanish history, society, and culture from the Second 
Republic through the Spanish Civil War and Franco’s dictatorship, to democracy and the social and 
political movements of recent decades. Authors may include Alberti, Lorca, Buero Vallejo, Cela, 
Martín Gaite, Celaya, etc. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) 
requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course beyond 301.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
SPAN 335. FILM IN THE HISPANIC WORLD. An exploration of topics in film in the Hispanic 
world, including history, national productions, and genres. Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course 
beyond 301. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 344. HISPANICS IN THE U.S. A study of the lifestyles, heritage, influence, thoughts, and 
experiences of Cuban, Puerto Rican, Mexican American, Dominican, and other Spanish speakers in 
the United States today. Through extensive reading, videos and discussion, we will explore 
contemporary issues and topics of interest such as demographics, immigration, discrimination, 
workers' rights, education, the arts, customs, beliefs and daily life. The course will foster a greater 
awareness of the similarities and differences existing between these communities, as well as their 
contributions to American society. Of particular interest to students of Spanish, sociology, and political 
science. Required of all Spanish majors and those desiring teacher certification in Spanish. 
Prerequisite: Spanish 306. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SPAN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 362. ASPECTS OF LANGUAGE LEARNING. A course designed to provide opportunities 
to teach various grammar aspects of the Spanish language, and to examine and implement a variety of 
technical aspects and resources in the foreign language curriculum in preparation for student teaching. 
Teacher candidates will regularly reflect on their teaching experiences and will develop a portfolio of 
materials representing their teaching in the target language. Required of all students desiring teacher 
certification in a foreign language. Spring semester of the sophomore year, two hours. 
 



246 / Grove City College 

SPAN 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Spanish. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 390. STUDIES IN SPANISH. The topics of this course will vary each semester, addressing a 
variety of themes in linguistics or matters of cultural, social, and historical importance in the Hispanic 
world, including, but not limited to, Spain, Latin America, and Hispanics in the United States. 
Prerequisite: Spanish 295 or 301.  Offered periodically, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  

Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
Spanish. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
SPAN 480. INTERNSHIP IN SPANISH. This is an opportunity for Spanish majors to participate in 
a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and department faculty 
member. Most internships take place during the summer months. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 

GLOBAL STUDIES (GOBL) 
 These courses are designed for students who wish to gain familiarity with cultures and literatures 
other than their own. Prior knowledge of a foreign language is unnecessary. None of the courses below 
may be counted toward fulfillment of the requirements for a language major. 
 
GOBL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global studies. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in global 
studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 290. STUDIES IN MODERN LANGUAGE. Readings and discussion of topics in literature 
or language. Subject matter varies. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 300. INTERNATIONAL MANNERS AND MORES. This course equips students to 
recognize and appreciate cultural differences, their origins, and how they manifest in a variety of 
contexts. By exploring other customs and ways of thinking, this course prepares students to engage 
respectfully and effectively on the international stage. Of special value for students of any major who 
plan to work, study, and/or travel abroad, yet the principles studied and skills gained apply just as 
readily to interacting with any community or institution with a particular way of doing things.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
GOBL 310. CHICANO AND LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE. A survey with readings in 
English from representative literary works of Latin American and Chicano authors with an emphasis 
upon the study of Hispanic cultural identity and the integration of Christian thought.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
GOBL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global studies. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  

Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



Modern Languages / 247 
 

GOBL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in global 
studies. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 390. STUDIES IN MODERN LANGUAGE. Readings and discussion of topics in literature 
or language. Subject matter varies. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global studies. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
GOBL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in global 
studies. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

 
DEPARTMENT OF MUSIC 
Dr. Tedford, Chair; Dr. Paparone, Assistant Chair; Dr. Carter, Dr. Erb, Dr. Hasper, Dr. 
Huebert, Dr. Mueller, Dr. Munson. Additional Instructional Faculty: Ms. Agnew, Mr. 
Bellassai, Dr. Billock, Mr. Byo, Mr. Cameron, Mr. Fennell, Dr. Fitch, Mr. Heasley, Mr. 
Heid, Ms. Kohanski, Ms. Kubik, Mr. May, Ms. Philipp, Dr. Piastro-Tedford, Mr. Scanga, 
Ms. Scott, Mr. Tessmer, Mr. Venesky, Mr. Wasilko, Mr. Weber, Mrs. Young. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music—46 hours 
 Music Core (27 hours): 

Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 331, 332, 335, 476; and Music 
317 or 318. 

Applied Music (12 hours): 
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied 
instrument and an additional component of four (4) credits of group music classes or 
private lessons in a secondary applied area(s). Students must take an applied lesson 
in their primary area every semester they are enrolled at the college. 

Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences): 
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band, 
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles 
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind, 
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an 
ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in 
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed 
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled 
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles) 
to fulfill the degree requirement. 

Recital Attendance Requirement: 
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance 
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals. 

 
Recommended music electives include Music 223, 224, 230, 303, 304, 311, 325, 326, 329, 
330, 360, 403, 426, 460, and 488.  
 
Courses that count in the Music major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MUSI” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 



248 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music/Business—63 hours  
 Music Core (28 hours): 

Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 221, 331, 332, 335; Music 476 
or 480; and two courses from Music 107, 108, 207, 209, or 307. 

Applied Music (8 hours): 
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied 
instrument. Students must take an applied lesson in their primary area every 
semester they are enrolled at the college.  

Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences): 
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band, 
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles 
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind, 
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an 
ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in 
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed 
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled 
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles) 
to fulfill the degree requirement. 

Recital Attendance Requirement: 
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance 
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.  

 Business Concentration (18 hours):  
Complete one concentration area choosing from:  

Business: Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; Management 103, 201; and 
Marketing 104. 
Management: Management 103, 457, 475, and three courses from Management 
302, 304, 307, 324, 424, 433, 450, 458, 464, and 465. 
Marketing: Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, 419, and once course from Marketing 
412, 414, 417, and 420.  

 
Courses that count in the Music/Business major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MUSI”, “ACCT”, “ECON”, “FNCE”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefixes, 
excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music and PreK-12 Education 
Certification—98 hours 
 The Pennsylvania Department of Education recognizes this major as an approved 
program for meeting the requirements of the Instructional I (Provisional) teaching 
certificate. For teacher certification requirements, see the Dept. of Education section. 
 Music Core (39 hours): 

Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 219, 221, 304 or 
403, 307, 317, 318, 331, 332, 335, and 476. 

Applied Music (10 hours): 
Students must complete a minimum of a one-credit lesson for each semester except 
the student teaching semester in their primary applied instrument (seven credits); two 
(2) one-credit piano lessons or piano classes or Music 129; and one (1) one-credit 
guitar lesson or guitar class.  

Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences): 
Students must complete a total of 7 credit hours in Music 100 Band, Music 101 



Music / 249 
 

Concert Choir, and Music 102 Orchestra. Specifically, students must take a 
minimum of two hours of Music 100 (comprising of one semester of Marching 
Band and one semester of Concert Band); two hours of Music 101; two hours of 
Music 102; and one additional hour using their primary applied area. An additional 
3 ensembles (credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 
101, 102, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is 
vocal, wind, string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must 
participate in an ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they 
are enrolled in the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one 
transcript-listed ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 
occurrences of enrolled ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or 
non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement. 

Recital Attendance Requirement: 
Music education majors must register each semester, except the student teaching 
semester, for Music 199, which requires attendance at a predetermined number of 
faculty, senior, and student recitals.  

Professional Education Requirements (42 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 488; Music Education 202, 213, 214, 313, 314, 372, 373, 435, 
437; Psychology 102; Special Education 102, and 103. *Note: Students who 
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete 
the Education 202 requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Music and PreK-12 Education Certification major quality 
point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with ‘MUSE”, “MUSI” and “EDUC” prefix; Psychology 102; Special 
Education 102 and 103. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum 
QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music Performance—70 hours    

Music Core (29 hours):  
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 331, 332, 335, 376, 475; and 
Music 317 or 318. 

Music Electives (10 hours): 
Students must complete a minimum of ten (10) credits of Music elective courses. 

Recital Attendance Requirement: 
Students must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance at a 
predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.  

Performance Concentration (31 hours): 
Choose one of the following options: 

Instrumental Music Concentration 
Concentration Core: 

Music 304, 328, 334, and one of Music 107, 108, 207, or 307. 
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 16 occurrences): 

Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 100 
Band or Music 102 Orchestra every semester (8 semesters). An additional 8 
ensembles (credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 
100, 102, 114, 115, 117, or 118. Students must have a total of 16 
occurrences of enrolled ensembles (8 credited ensembles and 8 additional 
credit or non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement. 

 



250 / Grove City College 

Applied Music: 
Students must complete a one-hour lesson in their primary applied 
instrument each semester (8 semesters).  

Piano Concentration 
Concentration Core: 

Music 129, 224, and 327. 
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 12 occurrences): 

Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 100 
Band, Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra every semester (8 
semesters). An additional 4 ensembles (non-credit) must be completed, 
choosing from Music 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students must have a 
total of 12 occurrences of enrolled ensembles (8 credited ensembles and 4 
additional non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement. 

Applied Music: 
Students must complete a one-hour piano lesson (Music 152) each semester 
(8 semesters). Students must also complete two (2) one-half hour organ 
lessons (Music 155). 

 Vocal Concentration 
Concentration Core: 

Music 209, 211, 223 (taken two times), and 333. 
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 16 occurrences): 

Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 101 
Concert Choir every semester (8 semesters). An additional 8 ensembles 
(non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 116 or 119. Students 
must have a total of 16 occurrences of enrolled ensembles (8 credited 
ensembles and 8 additional non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree 
requirement. 

Applied Music: 
Students must complete a one-hour voice lesson (Music 162) each semester 
(8 semesters).  

 
Courses that count in the Music Performance major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MUSI” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to 
graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music/Religion—72 hours 

Music Core (32 hours):  
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 221, 331, 332, 335, and 476; 
Music 317 or 318; and choose 2 courses from Music 107, 108, 207, 209, or 307. 

Applied Music (10 hours): 
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied 
instrument and an additional component of two (2) credits of group music classes or 
private lessons in a secondary applied area(s). Students must take an applied lesson 
in their primary area every semester they are enrolled at the college.  

Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences): 
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band, 
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles 
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind, 
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an 



Music / 251 
 

ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in 
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed 
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled 
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles) 
to fulfill the degree requirement. 

Recital Attendance Requirement: 
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance 
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.  

Religion Requirements (23 hours):  
Music 325; Religion 211, 212, 216, 246; one of Religion 221, 232, 237, 238, or 351; 
one of Religion 261, 341, or 362; and one of Religion 247, 251, 320, or 330.   

Courses that count in the Music/Religion major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “MUSI” and “RELI” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required 
to graduate. 
  
Applied Music 
 Private lessons are offered in piano, organ, voice, strings, brass, woodwinds, guitar, 
harp, and percussion. 
 Piano classes offer group instruction in a piano lab to develop skills in playing solo 
literature, accompaniment, harmonization, and transposition. Classes are available at 
various levels of proficiency. 
 Voice classes offering group instruction in the techniques of voice production are 
available at beginning and intermediate levels. 
 Guitar classes are available at beginning and intermediate levels. 
 
Ensemble 
 Credit may be earned for membership in performing organizations during each 
semester. Ensembles offered for credit include Concert Band, Concert Choir, Marching 
Band, and Orchestra. Other ensembles are available on a non-credit basis.  
 The Music Department has designated courses within the Bachelor of Music degree as 
Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL). These 
courses provide the necessary skills that will be needed by a professional music educator, 
performer, conductor, composer, or scholar. Music 203, and 204 are designated as SI 
courses. They provide the music student with skills necessary to speak in front of an 
audience as part of a performance and to deliver oral presentations in the music content area. 
Music 331 and 332 are designated as IL and WI courses. They provide the music student 
with an introduction to music research skills encompassing use of musical scores, 
recordings, traditional library sources and Internet use. Implementing the IL and WI skills 
provides the necessary skills used in all areas of the music profession. Music 221 is also an 
IL course. This music technology course provides the student with MIDI experience, sound 
technology, and information access through the Internet.  
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Music (18 hours) 
    A minor in Music will consist of Music 103, 104, 105; Music 331 or 332; three, ½ hour 
juried lessons, choosing from Music 150-191; two semesters participation (for credit) in 
Music 100, 101, or 102; and four additional hours of Music electives. In addition, while 
enrolled as a music minor, students must register each semester for Music 198, which 
requires attendance at four recitals per semester; perform in at least two student recitals 
while enrolled as a music minor; and attend all Music Department meetings each semester. 



252 / Grove City College 

Note: All prospective Music Minors must pass an audition before being admitted into the 
music minor program. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Musical Theatre (21 hours) 
 A minor in Musical Theatre will consist of Music 103, 105, 161 or 162 (minimum 3 
credits); Music 222, Music or Theatre 210, Theatre 251, and six additional hours choosing 
from Music 161, 162, 222, Physical Education 211, 213, 290 Jazz & Tap, Theatre 262, 320, 
and 351. Note: All prospective Musical Theatre minors must pass an audition before being 
admitted into the Musical Theatre minor program. 
  Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

MUSIC (MUSI) 
MUSI 100. BAND. Fall Semester: The college marching band begins its year with band camp one 
week before classes begin in the fall. The band performs at home football games, selected away football 
games, and high school band festivals. Spring Semester: The symphonic band performs all styles of 
concert literature and presents two concerts during the semester. Auditions are held during the first 
week of each semester. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 101. CONCERT CHOIR. Concert choir members prepare, study, and present choral literature. 
The choir performs two concerts each semester, as well as for special campus services when applicable. 
Auditions are held during the first week of each semester. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 102. ORCHESTRA. The college orchestra performs a repertoire of classical as well as modern 
music. The orchestra performs one concert during the fall semester and two during the spring semester. 
Seating auditions are held the first week of fall semester, with new member auditions during the first 
week of spring semester.  Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 103. MUSIC THEORY I. The first in a sequence of four music theory courses. This course 
covers fundamentals of music as well as beginning musical analysis, counterpoint, and four-part 
writing. Prerequisite: Music major, music minor, or with the permission of the instructor.  

Semester only, three hours. 
 
MUSI 104. MUSIC THEORY II. The second in a sequence of four music theory courses. This course 
covers part-writing and analysis including all diatonic chords and tonic, dominant, and pre-dominant 
functions. Prerequisite: Music 103.  Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 105. AURAL SKILLS I. An aural skills and sight singing class including melodic dictation, 
interval recognition, and chord identification. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 106. AURAL SKILLS II. A continuation of Music 105, including all intervals, melodic 
dictation with large leaps, melodic and harmonic error detection, and chord identification including I, 
ii, iii, IV, V, and vi triads. Prerequisite: Music 105. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 107. BRASS METHODS. Class instruction in the brass instruments with emphasis on 
development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite: Music major and minors only, 
or with the permission of the instructor. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 108. PERCUSSION METHODS. Class instruction in percussion instruments with emphasis 
on development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite: Music major and minors 
only, or with the permission of the instructor. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 114. GROVE CITY COLLEGE WIND ENSEMBLE. The Wind Ensemble is a select group 
of instrumental music students. This 45-member ensemble performs music of an academic nature 



Music / 253 
 

including contemporary, classical, and standard wind literature. Enrollment is open to students of all 
majors by audition. Auditions are held during the first week of spring semester.  
 Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 115. GROVE CITY COLLEGE CHAMBER ORCHESTRA. The Chamber Orchestra is a 
select group of string players and other select wind and percussion students who must audition to join. 
This ensemble performs more challenging works from the string and chamber repertoires. The group 
presents music in each orchestra concert and other selected performances during the academic year. 
Auditions are held during the first week of fall semester. Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 116. GROVE CITY COLLEGE TOURING CHOIR. The Touring Choir is comprised of 
selected vocalists who are committed to striving for excellence in the choral art. The choir sings for 
campus events, area churches, and takes a ten-day tour during a spring semester break. Auditions are 
held during the first week of fall semester. Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 117. GROVE CITY COLLEGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE. The Jazz Ensemble is an advanced 
instrumental performing group. This group performs Swing, Bebop, Latin, Fusion, and other modern 
styles of jazz literature. Improvisational and advanced comping skills are highly desirable for 
membership in this ensemble. The Jazz Ensemble performs two college concerts per year in addition 
to several off-campus events. Musicians are selected by an open audition process during the 1st and 
2nd week of the fall semester.  Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 118. GROVE CITY COLLEGE STAGE BAND. The Stage Band is an instrumental 
performing group that plays less demanding literature that develops jazz style, articulation, and 
phrasing. While improvisation skills are not required for this group, they are encouraged and 
developed. Musicians are selected by an open audition process during the 1st and 2nd week of the 
fall semester. The Stage Band typically performs two college concerts per year. 
 Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 119. GROVE CITY COLLEGE SINGERS. The Grove City College Singers is comprised of 
auditioned female vocalists who are interested in singing a variety of sacred and secular vocal 
literature. In addition to two formal concerts during the academic year, the ensemble sings at a variety 
of campus venues, including alumni events, and a chapel service during the fall semester. Auditions 
are held during the first week of fall semester. Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 123. PIANO CLASS I. The first in a sequence of piano classes, this course is intended for 
students with no background in piano playing. Skills developed in this course include: reading pitch 
and rhythm; repertoire in five-finger positions in various keys; white-key major and minor scales in 
two octaves, hands separately; introduction of changes of position (thumb crossing, finger substitution, 
extension, contraction, leap); I and V 6/5 chords in all major keys. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 124. PIANO CLASS II. The second in a sequence of piano courses, this course is intended for 
students who have the basic skills developed in Music 123 Piano Class I. The course includes: 
repertoire with easy changes of position; black-key major and minor scales in two octaves, hands 
separately; chord progressions I-V in all major and minor keys; harmonization using I and V 6/5; and 
sight-reading in five-finger positions. See instructor for placement. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 125. PIANO CLASS III. The third in a sequence of piano courses, this course is intended for 
students who have acquired the basic skills developed in Music 124 Piano Class II. The course 
includes: intermediate level repertoire by standard composers; all major scales, two octaves, hands 
together; chord progressions I-IV-V-I in major and minor keys; harmonization using I, IV 6/4, and V 
6/5 chords in major and minor keys; and sight-reading easy pieces with minimal changes of position; 
and transposing of simple melodies. See instructor for placement. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 126. PIANO CLASS IV. The fourth in a sequence of piano courses, this course is intended for 
students who have attained the skills covered in Music 125 Piano Class III. The course includes: 
standard repertoire at the intermediate and advanced-intermediate levels; all major scales, two octaves, 



254 / Grove City College 

hands together; chord progressions I-IV-ii-V7-I in major and minor keys; harmonization using I, IV 
6/4, and V 6/5 in various accompaniment patterns; sight-reading early intermediate repertoire; 
introduction of hymn playing, reading open score (SATB), and playing easy accompaniments. See 
instructor for placement. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 129. ACCOMPANYING: VOCAL AND INSTRUMENTAL. This course provides 
instruction in the art of accompanying singers and instrumentalists on the piano. Various musical 
aspects are addressed, including phrasing and tempo, metrical pulse, tonal balance, recitative, orchestra 
reductions, alto and tenor clefs, transposing instruments, and musical style periods. Practical issues 
include page turning, proper deportment on stage, and rehearsal techniques. Prerequisite: Piano skills 
above the intermediate level.  Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 131. ORGAN CLASS. This course is for music as well as non-music majors interested in the 
organ and its literature. The course also studies the history and design of the organ as well as acoustics 
and liturgical architecture. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 135. GUITAR CLASS I. This is an introductory course designed to provide the student with a 
means of self-expression through playing the guitar. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 137. GUITAR CLASS II. This course is for the student who has a basic knowledge of the 
guitar. This course includes teaching correct methods for learning flamenco techniques, aural and 
visual analysis, and performance harmonizing. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 141. BEGINNING VOICE CLASS. This course teaches vocal production and song 
presentation. Individuals demonstrate and perform for class members. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 144. INTERMEDIATE VOICE CLASS. This course teaches vocal production and song 
presentation for students with previous experience. Individuals demonstrate and perform for class 
members. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 151-152. PRIVATE PIANO LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(151) or one full hour for two credits (152) of individual instruction at the piano. The level of repertoire 
will depend upon the technical and musical abilities of the student.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 155-156. PRIVATE ORGAN LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(155) or one full hour for two credits (156) of individual instruction at the organ. The student will study 
literature appropriate to the organ and also work on technical development.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 161-162. PRIVATE VOICE LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(161) or one full hour for two credits (162) of private instruction in voice. Vocal production, language 
training, and performance skills for the individual singer are taught.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 163-164. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - CELLO. This course consists of one-half hour for 
one credit (163) or one full hour for two credits (164) of individual instruction on the cello. Students 
will improve technical skill as well as become familiar with string literature for the cello.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 165-166. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - VIOLIN/VIOLA. This course consists of one-half 
hour for one credit (165) or one full hour for two credits (166) of individual instruction on the violin 
or viola. Students will improve technical skill as well as become familiar with string literature for the 
violin or viola. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 167-168. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - FRENCH HORN. This course consists of one-half 
hour for one credit (167) or one full hour for two credits (168) of individual instruction on French horn. 



Music / 255 
 

Included in the instruction are techniques for developing embouchure; fingerings and their alternates; 
and solo repertoire for the French horn. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 169-170. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - TROMBONE. This course consists of one-half hour 
for one credit (169) or one full hour for two credits (170) of individual instruction on the trombone. 
Special emphasis is placed on slide positions, embouchure, trigger fingerings, and appropriate 
repertoire. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 171-172. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - TRUMPET. This course consists of one-half hour 
for one credit (171) or one full hour for two credits (172) of individual instruction on the trumpet. The 
student will become familiar with solo repertoire as well as fingerings and their alternates, tone quality, 
embouchure, and breathing techniques. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 173-174. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - BARITONE/TUBA. This course consists of one-
half hour for one credit (173) or one full hour for two credits (174) of individual instruction for the 
student to develop proficiency on one of the lower brass instruments: baritone/euphonium or tuba. 
Playing techniques; fingerings and their alternates; tone quality; embouchure; and a variety of 
appropriate literature for the instrument will be presented. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 175-176. PRIVATE BASSOON LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(175) or one full hour for two credits (176) of individual instruction on the bassoon. The student will 
become familiar with fingerings, embouchure, reed making, and bassoon literature.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 177-178. PRIVATE CLARINET LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one 
credit (177) or one full hour for two credits (178) of individual instruction on the clarinet. The student 
will gain mastery of the basic techniques of performance including literature, intonation, hand position, 
articulation, fingerings, and embouchure. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 179-180. PRIVATE OBOE/ENGLISH HORN LESSON. This course consists of one-half 
hour for one credit (179) or one full hour for two credits (180) of individual instruction on the oboe or 
English horn. The student will become familiar with fingerings, embouchure, reed making and 
literature. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 181-182. PRIVATE PERCUSSION LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one 
credit (181) or one full hour for two credits (182) of individual instruction on all of the percussion 
instruments. The course teaches playing techniques, fundamentals of each instrument, and literature.
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 183-184. PRIVATE FLUTE LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(183) or one full hour for two credits (184) of individual instruction for the student who is interested 
in developing knowledge of flute literature; technique; tone quality and vibrato; fingerings; and 
embouchure. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 185-186. PRIVATE GUITAR LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(185) or one full hour for two credits (186) of individual instruction for the student wishing to 
concentrate on techniques and fundamentals of guitar playing. Instruction is given on chords, harmonic 
structure, scales, and literature. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 187-188. PRIVATE HARP LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one credit 
(187) or one full hour for two credits (188) of individual instruction at the harp. Must have prior harp 
or piano experience. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 189-190. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - BASS. This course consists of one-half hour for one 
credit (189) or one full hour for two credits (190) of individual instruction on the string bass. Students 
will improve technical skill as well as become familiar with string literature for the bass. 
 Semester course, one or two hours. 



256 / Grove City College 

MUSI 191-192. PRIVATE SAXOPHONE LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one 
credit (191) or one full hour for two credits (192) of individual instruction on the saxophone. The 
student will gain mastery of the basic techniques of performance including literature, intonation, hand 
position, articulation, fingerings, and embouchure. Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 193-194. PRIVATE COMPOSITION LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for 
one credit (193) or one full hour for two credits (194) of individual instruction on musical composition. 
This course teaches techniques for writing for instrumental and vocal ensembles, solo works, and small 
ensembles.  Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 195-196. PRIVATE CONDUCTING LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one 
credit (195) or one full hour for two credits (196) of individual instruction on musical conducting. This 
course teaches techniques for conducting and rehearsing bands, choirs, or orchestras.  
 Semester course, one or two hours. 
 
MUSI 198. MUSIC RECITAL ATTENDANCE FOR MUSIC MINORS. Students fulfill this 
requirement by attending four recitals each semester they are enrolled as music minors. Students 
minoring in music must register for this course each semester. Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 199. MUSIC RECITAL ATTENDANCE FOR MUSIC MAJORS. Students fulfill this 
requirement by attending a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals each semester. 
Music majors, other than those in Music Education, must register for this course each semester. Music 
Education majors must register for this course each semester, except for the student teaching semester. 
The student’s academic advisor will monitor compliance with this requirement. 
 Semester course, zero hours. 
 
MUSI 203. MUSIC THEORY III. The third in a sequence of four music theory courses. Forms and 
analysis are covered, including binary form, ternary form, variations, rondo and sonata form. In 
addition, the elements of chromatic harmony, including harmonic sequences, applied chords, 
tonicization, modulation, modal mixture, Neapolitan chords, and augmented chords are studied. This 
course meets the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for music majors. Prerequisite: Music 103 and 
104.  Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 204. MUSIC THEORY IV. The fourth in a sequence of four music theory courses. This course 
covers tonal ambiguity, enharmonic modulation, altered common tone chords, chromatic sequences, 
intervallic cells, and the division of the octave. Twentieth-century topics and techniques are studied, 
including impressionism, neo-classicism, quartal harmony, serialism, set theory, minimalism, and 
electronic techniques. This course meets the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for music majors. 
Prerequisite: Music 203.  Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 205. AURAL SKILLS III. The third in a sequence of four courses that develop aural 
recognition through sight singing and dictation. Skill sets include recognition of harmonic and melodic 
intervals, modes, triads and seventh chords, and harmonic progressions. Prerequisites: Music 105 and 
106. Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 206. AURAL SKILLS IV. The fourth in a sequence of four courses that develop aural 
recognition through sight singing and dictation. Skill sets include compound intervals, melodic 
dictation with modulating melodies, and progressions with seventh chords and secondary harmony. 
Prerequisite: Music 205. Semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 207. WOODWIND METHODS. Class instruction in the woodwind instruments with 
emphasis on the development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite: Music Major/ 
Minors only or with the permission of the instructor. Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 209 VOCAL METHODS. An overview course aimed at music education and voice 
performance majors including instruction concerning the mechanics of vocal sound production, vocal 



Music / 257 
 

teaching methods, and identifying and correcting vocal faults in the private studio and the choral 
setting. Prerequisite: Music major and minors only, or with the permission of the instructor.  
 Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 210. INTRODUCTION TO MUSICAL THEATRE. This class is a survey of the 
development of musical theatre as a performing art form in America from 1750 to the present. By 
looking at musical theatre from multiple perspectives--historical, cultural, political, social, aesthetic – 
the class will explore the ways in which musicals both reflect and embody values and trends of the 
cultural landscape in which they were written. Included will be practical study of the format of the 
libretto and musical score in relationship to the major musical theatre genre. Students may only receive 
credit for one of Music 210 or Theatre 210.       Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 211. VOCAL DICTION. This course is aimed at music education and voice performance 
majors and will include instruction concerning the International Phonetic Alphabet; diction rules for 
singing in Italian, French, German, and English; and the accurate pronunciation of sung Italian, French, 
English, and German. The course meetings will consist of lecture, audio/video examples, and class 
participation. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 219. BEGINNING CONDUCTING. A study of the fundamentals of conducting and rehearsal 
strategies with an emphasis on beginning instrumental and choral techniques. Emphasis is placed on 
developing baton technique and hand gestures, score study, and developing a comprehensive approach 
to conducting. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 221. MUSIC TECHNOLOGY. This course provides the student with music notation 
experience, audio processing experience, background in music industry practices (including music 
copyright) and provides experience with creating social-media rich websites. This course meets the 
Information Literacy (IL) requirement for music majors. Prerequisite: Music majors only. 
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 222. MUSICAL THEATRE WORKSHOP. This course is designed to educate students about 
the musical theatre genre and all of its sub-genres through research, writing, rehearsal, and 
performance, and to improve their singing, acting, and performance skills. The main focus of class 
meetings will be rehearsal of assigned scenes according to registered students’ abilities. Students will 
learn at least one musical theatre scene, memorize it, block it, and perform it in a public performance 
at the end of the semester. Semester course, two credits. 
 
MUSI 223. OPERA WORKSHOP. This course will introduce the student to selected scenes from 
operas. There will be a focus on scene analysis and character development within the context of an 
operatic role. Class will encourage singers to integrate the vocal and physical connection of theater 
with language and music. Course may be repeated. Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 224. PIANO PEDAGOGY. This course explores aspects of the piano teaching profession, 
including techniques and methods for various ability levels, repertoire selection, and the business 
aspects of the career field. Alternate years, Semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 225. OPERA WORKSHOP. This course will introduce the student to selected scenes from 
operas. There will be a focus on scene analysis and character development within the context of an 
operatic role. Class will encourage singers to integrate the vocal and physical connection of theater 
with language and music. Course may be repeated. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 230. JAZZ HISTORY. A study of the literature and culture of jazz music and jazz musicians 
of the 20th and 21st centuries. The course discusses the people, history, and compositions of jazz 
with a focus on the musical characteristics that define early jazz, swing, bebop, fusion, experimental 
and modern jazz styles. Although a background in music is helpful, it is not required.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 



258 / Grove City College 

MUSI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in music. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 290. STUDIES IN MUSIC. Intensive examination of an area of music not fully covered by 
regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
MUSI 302. LITERATURE OF MUSIC. A non-technical survey of the great musical compositions 
of Western civilization by way of classroom listening. Recommended for non-music majors.  
 Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 303. COUNTERPOINT. A study of the contrapuntal style and practices of Palestrina and other 
masters of the sixteenth century; compositions of modal counterpoint in two, three and four parts. 
Prerequisite: Music 203 or 204. Alternate years, semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 304. ORCHESTRATION. A study of the variety and characteristics of the brass, reed, string 
and percussion instrument families, progressing from solo instruments through scoring for full band 
and orchestra. The ability to read music and a basic understanding of music theory is desirable but 
not required. Prerequisite: Music 204.  Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 307. STRING METHODS. Class instruction in the string instruments of the orchestra; 
methods of instruction for younger orchestra, with emphasis on the principles of tone production, 
intonation, bowing, and phrasing. Prerequisite: Music major and minors only, or with the permission 
of the instructor. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
MUSI 311. KEYBOARD HARMONY. An elective course in harmonic practice at the keyboard. 
Prerequisite: Music 204. Alternate years, semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 317. ADVANCED CHORAL CONDUCTING. A course for students desiring further 
experience in conducting advanced choral material. Prerequisite: Music 219. 
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 318. ADVANCED INSTRUMENTAL CONDUCTING. A course for students desiring 
further experience in conducting advanced instrumental material. Prerequisite: Music 219.  
 Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 325. CHURCH MUSIC. A historical and theological study of church music, a study of hymns 
and practical application. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSI 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed to analyze 
the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including how these issues began, 
how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will explore copyright law, including fair 
use and public domain, and how it affects sampling, interpolation, and mashups. The course will 
explore contracts related to songwriting, 360° deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal 
documents related to bands, booking, and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new 
means of creating and disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual 
reality, and explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of ENTR 
324, MNGT 324, or MUSI 324.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is designed as an 
introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest instruction on best practices 
for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this field. Students will have the opportunity 



Music / 259 
 

to learn the fundamental principles involved in the entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music 
business, exploring the structural and functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing 
industry. Particular attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music 
business in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Entrepreneurship 326, 
Management 326, or Music 326. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 327. PIANO LITERATURE. This course is a study of the literature for the piano, beginning 
with works of the 17th century intended for harpsichord, and ending with the 20th century works for the 
modern piano. The course includes a general overview of keyboard music in each historical era, as 
well as a selective list of works from each era for in-depth study. The historical approach highlights 
the development of the instrument and the development of compositional styles, performance 
practices, pianistic idioms, and playing techniques. Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 328. WIND LITERATURE. This course has been designed to prepare instrumental music 
majors to analyze, aurally and visually, the repertoire of the modern-day concert band. Topics to be 
explored include, but are not limited to, various time periods, genres and geographical influences on 
concert wind band composition; analysis of compositions for various compositional elements and 
historical background; and compositional form, instrumentation, pedagogy, and performance 
practices.  Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 329. WORLD MUSIC: AFRICA AND THE AMERICAS. This course will study the music, 
culture, and unique musical traditions resulting from the confluence of African culture and European 
culture, a result of European colonialism. The course includes various musical/cultural traditions of 
South America, Latin America, the Caribbean Islands, and North America. 
  Alternate years, Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 330. WORLD MUSIC: ASIA AND THE MIDDLE EAST. This course will study the musical 
systems of Asian music, comparing and contrasting the musical/cultural traditions of East Asia, South 
Asia, Southeast Asia, and Oceania (including, but not limited to, China, Japan, Korea, Thailand, 
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Indonesia), and the Middle East.   
 Alternate years, Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 331. MUSIC HISTORY I. A survey of music in Western civilization from ancient Greece to 
1750. This course, along with Music 221 and 332, meets the Writing Intensive (WI) and Information 
Literacy (IL) requirements for music majors. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 332. MUSIC HISTORY II. A survey of music in Western civilization from 1750 to 1900. This 
course, along with Music 221 and 331, meets the Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) 
requirements for music majors. Prerequisite: Humanities 301. Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 333. VOCAL LITERATURE. This course will provide an overview of art songs composed in 
German, French, Italian, and English from the 17th through 21st centuries. The main objective of this 
course is to improve students’ knowledge of core vocal literature in the art song genre through 
investigation into composers’ lives, works, compositional style, and composers’ relationships with 
poets and poetry. Issues of interpretation and performance practices will also be addressed. 
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 334. ORCHESTRAL LITERATURE. This course has been designed to prepare instrumental 
music majors to analyze, aurally and visually, the repertoire of the modern-day symphony orchestra. 
Topics to be explored include, but are not limited to, various time periods, genres and geographical 
influences on orchestral composition; analysis of compositions for various compositional elements and 
historical background; and compositional form, instrumentation, pedagogy, and performance 
practices. Semester course, two hours. 
 



260 / Grove City College 

MUSI 335. MUSIC HISTORY III. A survey of music in Western civilization from 1900 to the 
present. This course, along with Music 331 and 332, meets the Writing Intensive (WI) and Information 
Literacy (IL) requirements for music majors. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.  
 Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.   
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in music. 
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 376. JUNIOR RECITAL. The junior recital represents a preliminary step toward the senior 
capstone recital, which is the culmination of study in an area of applied performance. The recitalist 
demonstrates knowledge of the technique, repertoire, and stylistic interpretation that has been acquired 
in the applied area during the previous semesters of study. The junior recital is a one-half hour public 
performance. Prerequisites: Music major with junior standing. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSI 403. COMPOSITION. An elective course in music composition. This course discusses the 
fundamentals of music composition in terms of melody, harmony, form, texture and timbre with both 
an historical perspective (referencing masterpieces from the 12th through 21st centuries) and the 
opportunity to develop a personal compositional style. The bulk of the course is devoted to work on 
original student compositions. Prerequisite: Music 204.  Semester course, two hours. 
 
MUSI 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview of key music 
marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation for all music marketing 
plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for musicians, including publicity, 
advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital distribution, touring, licensing/synch, and radio. 
Students will learn what companies and partners to work with to reach their core fans, how to 
communicate with them, and the ways to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the internet 
offers to marketers. In addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their vision, 
identify a market need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing plan 
goals, and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price, 
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for one of 
Music 426, Marketing 426, or Entrepreneurship 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 204.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
MUSI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in music. 
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 475-476. SENIOR CAPSTONE RECITAL. The senior capstone recital is the culmination of 
study in an area(s) of applied performance. The recitalist demonstrates knowledge of the technique, 
repertoire, and stylistic interpretation that has been acquired in the applied area(s) during the previous 
semesters of study. The senior recital is a public performance. Performance majors will complete a full 
one-hour recital (MUSI 475) for two credits. Music, Music/Business, Music K-12 Education, and 
Music/Religion majors will complete a one-half hour recital (MUSI 476) for one credit.  

Semester course, one to two hours. 
 
MUSI 480. INTERNSHIP IN MUSIC. This is an opportunity for Music majors to participate in a 
meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer and department faculty 
member. Most internships take place during the summer months. Semester course, one to six hours. 



Music / 261 
 

MUSI 488. SEMINAR IN MUSIC. Available only by permission of the department and the instructor 
involved. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
MUSI 499. HONORS IN MUSIC. A course beyond the regular requirements for the music major. 
Available only to students with senior status and on an individual basis. Semester course, one hour. 
 

MUSIC EDUCATION (MUSE) 
MUSE 202. INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC EDUCATION. This course is designed for students 
majoring in music education. This course is intended to be taken concurrently with Foundations of 
Teaching (EDUC 202). This course focuses a close lens on the many facets of music education, 
including the historical and philosophical foundations of music education, special education in the 
music classroom, curriculum/lesson/unit planning and assessment, as well as the political and social 
issues facing music educators today. This course requires students to participate in class discussions 
and to write a formal paper focusing on a topic relevant to the course. Corequisite: Education 202. 
 Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSE 315. MUSIC METHODS FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS. A study of music materials 
and teaching methods designed to prepare the elementary and preschool teacher to engage students in 
musical learning experiences. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSE 213. PREK-4 ELEMENTARY MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music methods, 
pedagogy, materials, and applications for the PreK-4 elementary music teacher. Directed field 
experience in the PreK-4 schools is required. Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSE 214. MIDDLE LEVEL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music methods, pedagogy, 
materials, and applications for the middle level (grades 5-8) music teacher. Directed field experience 
in the middle level schools is required. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSE 313. SECONDARY CHORAL AND GENERAL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music 
methods, pedagogy, materials, and applications for the secondary (grades 9-12) general and vocal 
music teacher. Directed field experience in the secondary choral classroom/school is required. 
 Fall semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSE 314. SECONDARY INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music methods, 
pedagogy, materials, and applications for the secondary (grades 9-12) instrumental music teacher. 
Directed field experience in the secondary schools is required. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
MUSE 372. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to permit K-12 Music majors to engage in an observational and participatory field experience 
as approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: Music K-12 major. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSE 373. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship course 
designed to permit K-12 Music majors to engage in pre-student teaching. Participatory field experience 
approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: Music K-12 major. Semester course, one hour. 
 
MUSE 435. STUDENT TEACHING, ELEMENTARY MUSIC. Senior level Music Education 
credential candidates student teach in elementary public schools an equivalency of five days per week 
for seven weeks and attend one practicum session per week. Corequisite: Music Education 437. 
 One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 
MUSE 437. STUDENT TEACHING, SECONDARY MUSIC. Senior level Music Education 
credential candidates student teach at the junior/middle school and/or high school levels in the public 
secondary schools, an equivalency of five days per week for seven weeks and attend one practicum 
session per week. Corequisite: Music Education 435. One-half semester course, eight hours. 
 



262 / Grove City College 

CHARLES JR. and BETTY JOHNSON SCHOOL OF NURSING  
Dr. Roach, Chair; Dr. Skees. 
 

Please reference the Nursing Program Booklet: A Supplement to The 
College Bulletin for more detailed program information and requirements.  
  
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Nursing—105 hours 
 Nursing Core (43 hours): 

Nursing 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 141, 142, 143, and 144. 
Nursing BSN Requirements (21 hours): 

Nursing 431, 432, 433, 434, 445, 446, 447. 
Major Related Requirements (41 hours): 

Biology 207; Communication Arts 104; Exercise Science 215, 253, 258, 344; 
Philosophy 211; Psychology 101, 103, 201; Science 203; Sociology 241; and a one-
credit physical fitness (PHYE) elective course. 
 

Courses that count in the Nursing major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “NURS” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

NURSING (NURS) 
NURS 100. INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL NURSING. Introduction of professional 
nursing is a course that helps students explore the various aspects of nursing. The purpose of the course 
is to introduce nursing concepts to nursing majors prior to the admission to the nursing school 
curriculum. The course focuses on topics such as the historical foundation of the nursing profession, 
roles and functions of the nurse, education requirements, test-taking strategies, nursing process, ethical 
issues, cultural sensitivity, and basic nursing competences. Semester course, two hours. 
 
NURS 431. COMMUNITY AND PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING. This course focuses on the 
identification of health problems in terms of a community; beyond the health needs of just one person.  
The purpose of the course is to introduce public and community health issues and the associated 
nursing considerations that address the unique concerns of the community as the client. The course 
topics include health, safety, and nutrition of the community including vulnerable populations and 
accessibility to healthcare and utilization of resources. Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree in 
Applied Science from Butler County Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered 
Registered Nurse (RN) license.  Online, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
NURS 432. NURSING RESEARCH / EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE. This course focuses on 
the identification of nursing concerns within the clinical environment and the implementation of a 
strategic plan based upon the evidence that can improve the quality of clinical practice. The purpose 
of the course is to utilizes the steps of the evidence-based practice model to improve nursing practice.  
The course topics include the comparison of nursing practice models to EBP models, identification of 
patient problems, review of the literature, evidence appraisal, planning, implementing, and evaluating 
for positive outcomes. Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County 
Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.  
 Online, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
NURS 433. CRITICAL THINKING IN NURSING. This course focuses on the ongoing 
development of critical thinking skills within the clinical environment.  The purpose of the course is 
to review how to assess and promote critical thinking in the clinical practice.  The course topics include 
critical thinking, clinical reasoning, clinical judgment, reflection, mindfulness, prioritizing 
frameworks, professional development, and accountability. Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree 



Nursing / 263 
 

in Applied Science from Butler County Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered 
Registered Nurse (RN) license.   Online, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
NURS 434. ADVANCED NURSING ASSESSMENT. This course focuses on the ongoing 
development of assessment skills based upon the acuity, environment, and patient findings.  The 
purpose of the course is to review how to perform a complete physical assessment based upon 
presentation of symptoms, physical system(s) involved, health care setting, and patient findings/acuity.  
The course topics include identifying the purpose of the assessment, types of nursing assessments, 
head to toe assessment framework, data collection, interpretation or findings, and clinical decision 
making. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432, 433, Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from 
Butler County Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.  
 Online, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
NURS 445. ADVANCED PHARMACOLOGY FOR NURSES. This course focuses on the 
enhancement of the knowledge related to pharmacology, safe nursing practice in medication 
administration, and patient education of pharmacologic therapies.  The purpose of the course is to 
review how pharmacologic therapies are utilized in nursing practice and to promote critical thinking 
in the health care environment. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432, 433, Associate Nursing Degree in 
Applied Science from Butler County Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered 
Registered Nurse (RN) license.   Online, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
NURS 446. NURSING LEADERSHIP SEMINAR. This course focuses on developing leadership 
skills that directly impact the clinical care environment and foster positive patient outcomes. The 
purpose of the course is to introduce both nursing clinical leadership associated with management and 
leadership that can be developed and implemented at the bedside; both which emphasize the patient 
and the health care team. Additional topics will include leadership qualities and styles, accountability, 
self-care, professional development, and management structures. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432, 433, 
434, 445, Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County Community College 
(BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.  Online, spring semester only, 
three hours. 
    
NURS 447. NURSING CAPSTONE. This course focuses on the completion of a senior project which 
is a culmination of liberal arts education at GCC, the Associate of Applied Science Education of BC3, 
and the initiation into the nursing profession.  The purpose of this course is to build on the concepts 
and knowledge gained from previous nursing courses allowing for the application of theories and 
concepts associated with nursing leadership, nursing research, and management of care. Prerequisites: 
Nursing 431, 432, 433, 434, 445, Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County 
Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.   
 Online, spring semester only, three hours

DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS  
Dr. Wolinski, Chair; Dr. Brower, Dr. Clem, Dr. Marsch, Dr. Wagner. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics—81 hours 
 Physics Core (32 hours): 

Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 303, 305, 321, 431, and Astronomy 207. 
Physics Electives—choose 12 hours from: 

Physics 304, 310, 340, 401 or 402, 421, or 442. 
Technical Core requirements (26 hours): 

Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, 263; and Physics 
242. 

 Technical Electives (11 hours):  
Choose eleven hours from any 300-level Astronomy courses; any Biology courses; 
Chemistry 112 and 114; any 200- or 300-level Chemistry, Computer Science, 



264 / Grove City College 

Electrical Engineering, Engineering, or Mechanical Engineering courses; any 300-
level Mathematics courses; Physics 260, 270, 360, 370, 470; or any additional 
courses approved by the Department Chair. 
 

Courses that count in the Physics major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “PHYS” and “ASTR” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required 
to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics and Secondary 
Education Certification—116-118 hours 
 Physics Core (32 hours): 

Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 303, 305, 321, 431, and Astronomy 207.  
Physics Electives—choose 12 hours from: 

Physics 304, 310, 340, 401 or 402, 421, or 442. 
Technical Core requirements (26 hours): 

Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, 263; and Physics 
242. 

 Technical Electives (6-8 hours): 
Choose six to eight hours from Astronomy 310; any Biology courses; Chemistry 112 
and 114; Chemistry 345; Computer Science 220, 222, 244, 246, 252, 340, 342, 350; 
any engineering courses (except Engineering 156, 210, 402 or Electrical Engineering 
201, 251); any 300- or 400-level Mathematics courses; Physics 270, 370, 470, 486; 
or any additional courses approved by the Department Chair. A maximum of three 
hours from independent research may count toward this requirement. 

 Education requirements (40 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 
 

Courses that count in the Physics and Secondary Education Certification quality point 
average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “PHYS” and “ASTR” prefixes. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and 
MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification. 
 
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics and General Science 
Secondary Education Certification—97-98 hours 
 Physics Core (26 hours): 

Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 321, 486, and Astronomy 207. 
 Technical Core requirements (26-27 hours): 

Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Geology 201 or Science 204; Mathematics 161, 162, 
261; and Science 202 or Biology 101. 

 Technical Electives (6 hours): 
Choose six hours from any 300-level Astronomy course; Biology 102; Chemistry 
112 and 114; any Computer Science course numbered 215 or higher (excluding 
Computer Science 260, 270, 290, 360, 370, 390, 460, 470, 480, and 488); 
Mathematics 262; Mechanical Engineering 211, 212, 214; Physics 242, 270, 303, 
305, 310, 340, 370, 421, 431, 470; or any additional courses approved by the 
Department Chair. A maximum of three hours from independent research may count 
toward this requirement. 

  



Physics / 265 
 

Education requirements (40 hours): 
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 431, 488; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 
requirement. 

 
Courses that count in the Physics and General Science Secondary Education 
Certification major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “PHYS”, “ASTR”, and “EDUC” prefixes; Psychology 102; and 
Special Education 101. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for 
certification. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics/Computer—87-88 
hours 
 Physics/Computer Core requirements (40 hours): 

Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, 242, 288, 303, 321, 442; Astronomy 207; Computer 
Science 141, 233, 244, and 342. 

 Technical Core requirements (20 hours): 
 Chemistry 105; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, and 263. 

 Hardware or Software Option 
Choose one of the following options: 

Computer Hardware option (26-27 hours): 
Computer Hardware Requirements (20 hours): Electrical Engineering 201, 202, 
204, 251, 252, 306, 310, and Computer Science 220. 
Technical Electives (6-7 hours): Choose two of the following: Physics 304, 305, 
340, 401 or 402, 421, 431; Astronomy 310; or Mathematics 213. 

Computer Software option (22-23 hours): 
Computer Software Requirements (25-27 hours): Computer Science 220, 222, 
325, 340, 350; Physics 210; and two of Electrical Engineering 204; Computer 
Science 480 or Physics 270, 370, 470 (limit 3 hours); Computer Science 314 or 
any 400-level computer course; or Mathematics 213 or 222*. 
Technical Electives (3 hours): Choose one of the following: Physics 304, 305, 
340, 421, 431, or Astronomy 310. 

 * Students who elect Mathematics 213 and 222 will also receive a minor in 
Mathematics. 
 

Courses that count in the Physics/Computer major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “PHYS”, “ASTR”, “COMP”, and “ELEE” prefixes, MATH 222. A 
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Physics (18 hours) 
 A minor in Physics will consist of Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, and six hours from 
Physics 303, 305, 310, 431 or 442 (Electrical Engineering majors may not take Physics 
305). 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Astronomy (21 hours) 
 A minor in Astronomy will consist of Physics 101 or 121; Physics 102 or 122; and 
Astronomy 206, 207, 301, and 310. 
 
 
 



266 / Grove City College 

Course Requirements for a minor in Medical Physics (19 hours) 
 A minor in Medical Physics will consist of Physics 101 or 121; Physics 102 or 122; 
and Physics 234, 321, 401, and 402. 
 
 Training in both oral and written communication skills is an oft-neglected part of the 
undergraduate science curriculum. At the same time, communicating one’s ideas and results 
in a clear and coherent manner is an essential skill for a scientist, requiring clarity of thought 
and expression. In addition, a scientist must know how to find, analyze, and use information 
developed by others in their field. To address these concerns, all physics majors are required 
to take Physics 288 as a Writing Intensive (WI) course and Physics 321 as a Speaking 
Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) course. In tandem, these courses provide 
focused, discipline specific training in the areas of oral and written communications as well 
as the ability to gather, analyze and use information within the field of physics. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

PHYSICS (PHYS) 
PHYS 101. GENERAL PHYSICS I-ENGINEERING. A calculus-based study of mechanics 
including kinematics, Newton’s laws of motion, work, energy, linear momentum, rotational motion, 
angular momentum, gravity, equilibrium, fluids, oscillations, traveling and standing waves. Three 
lectures and one lab per week. Students may not receive credit for both Physics 101 and 121. 
Corequisite: Mathematics 161.  Semester course, four hours. 
 
PHYS 102. GENERAL PHYSICS II – ENGINEERING. A survey of the fundamental principles of 
electric fields and potentials, circuit theory, magnetism, Maxwell’s equations, light, interference, and 
diffraction. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Physics 101. Corequisite: Mathematics 
162.  Semester course, four hours. 
 
PHYS 121. COLLEGE PHYSICS I. A study of mechanics at the pre-calculus level with applications 
to the life sciences. Topics include kinematics, Newton’s laws, work, energy, momentum, angular 
motion, fluids, oscillations, and gravity. Three lectures and one lab per week. Students may not receive 
credit for both Physics 101 and 121. Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
PHYS 122. COLLEGE PHYSICS II. A study of electricity, magnetism, geometric and physical 
physics at the pre-calculus level with applications to the life sciences. Topics include electric field and 
potential, DC circuits, magnetism, induction, geometric and physical optics, relativity, and nuclear 
physics. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Physics 121.  
 Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
PHYS 135. HORIZONS IN PHYSICS. Discussion of current topics in physics. Since scientific 
journals will provide much of the content for this course, students will learn how to acquire and 
interpret articles from scholarly publications. In addition, students will be required to attend 
presentations by physicists actively engaged in research, as well as field trips to academic and 
industrial laboratories in the area. This course is open to all students but, in the event that the class 
becomes full, preference is given to physics majors. Fall semester only, one hour. 
 
PHYS 210. ELECTRONICS. An introduction to electronics emphasizing those topics most useful to 
the experimental physicist. As such, the physics of active and passive devices (resistors, capacitors, 
inductors, diodes, transistors, sensors, etc.) will be discussed along with practical circuit applications 
(filters, operational amplifiers, voltage regulators, oscillators, timers, etc.). The bulk of this course is 
devoted to analog electronics, but digital electronics is discussed briefly at the end of the semester. 
Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week. Prerequisite: Physics 102.  
 Fall semester only, four hours. 



Physics / 267 
 

PHYS 234. MODERN PHYSICS. An introduction to modern physics. Two essential areas will be 
covered: the special theory of relativity and the origins of quantum mechanics. Prerequisite: Physics 
102; or Physics 122 and Mathematics 162. Spring semester only, three hours 
. 
PHYS 242. INTRODUCTION TO THEORETICAL PHYSICS. An introduction to problem-
solving techniques used to describe physical phenomena. Includes topics from complex analysis, 
probability theory, vector calculus, Fourier series and transforms, matrix algebra, differential equations 
(ordinary and partial), and special functions. Prerequisites: Mathematics 261 and Physics 102, or by 
permission. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in physics. Sophomore 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
physics. Freshman or sophomore standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYS 288. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY. This course is designed to teach students the 
process of scientific investigation, transitioning them from introductory, cook-book labs to actual 
experimental design and execution. Experiments cover a variety of topics from classical and modern 
physics including propagation of error, waves, thermodynamics, optics, spectrophotometry, speed of 
light, and the photoelectric effect. This course is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Writing 
Intensive (WI) course in the physics major. Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
PHYS 303. MECHANICS I. The application of mathematical methods to the study of the general 
motion of particles; Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics; Hamilton’s equations; and selected 
applications. Prerequisites: Physics 101 and either Math 262 or Physics 242, or consent of instructor.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 304. MECHANICS II. A continuation of Mechanics I. Topics covered include dynamics of a 
system of particles, motion in a non-inertial reference frame, dynamics of rigid bodies, and coupled 
oscillations and waves. Prerequisite: Physics 303. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 305. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. A study of the fundamental principles of 
electricity and magnetism. Topics covered include vector calculus, electric field and potential, 
polarization, electric displacement, linear dielectrics, magnetostatics, and electrodynamics. 
Prerequisites: Physics 102 and Physics 242 or Mathematics 262. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 310. OPTICS. A study of electromagnetic waves. Topics covered include the Maxwell 
equations, geometric optics, interference, diffraction, polarization, coherence, holography, and topics 
from nonlinear optics. Prerequisites: Physics 305 or Electrical Engineering 304. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 321. RADIATION LABORATORY. An experimental study of the detection and 
characteristics of alpha, beta, gamma, and neutron radiation. One lecture and one lab per week. Physics 
321 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) 
course in the Physics major. Prerequisite: 234 or consent of the department. 
 Spring semester only, two hours. 
 
PHYS 340. THERMODYNAMICS AND STATISTICAL MECHANICS. A study of 
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics that includes topics such as heat and work; ideal gases; 
equipartition of energy, entropy, Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein distributions; and 
applications to heat engines, refrigeration, chemical equilibrium, phase transitions, blackbody 
radiation, and properties of solids. Prerequisites: Physics 234, and 242, or permission of the instructor.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 



268 / Grove City College 

PHYS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for independent study of specialized topics in 
physics. Junior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
PHYS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
physics. Junior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
PHYS 390. STUDIES IN PHYSICS. Examination of different areas in the field of physics not offered 
by regular course work. Subject matter varies each semester. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PHYS 401. RADIATION AND HEALTH PHYSICS. A study of radiation therapy principles in 
medicine. Topics include how radiation is generated and how it interacts with human tissue, dose limits 
and how they are calculated, radiation safety, and electron and proton beam therapy. Prerequisite: 
Physics 234 or permission of instructor. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 402. MEDICAL IMAGING AND DIAGNOSTIC PHYSICS. This course serves as an 
introduction to x-ray radiography and advanced diagnostic medical imaging techniques like x-ray 
tomography (CAT), ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission tomography. 
Prerequisite: Physics 234 or permission of instructor. 
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 421. ADVANCED TOPICS. An in-depth course in an advanced physics topic (or topics) 
chosen by the instructor. Content can vary from year to year but may be include areas such as general 
relativity, nuclear physics, elementary particle physics, solid-state physics, nanotechnology, etc. 
Prerequisites: Physics 234; and Mathematics 262 or Physics 242. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 431. QUANTUM MECHANICS. A study of wave-particle duality, the Bohr atom, and the 
development of quantum mechanics and its application to the periodic table and the nucleus and 
solving the Schrödinger equation for several 1D systems and for the Bohr atom. Prerequisites: Physics 
234, 303, and Mathematics 262 or Physics 242. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 442. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS IN PHYSICS. An advanced course in the solution of 
physics problems using computer programming and numerical techniques for ordinary differential 
equations, partial differential equations, algebraic equations, spectral analysis, optimization, and 
numerical integration. Corequisites: Computer 141; Physics 303; and Mathematics 262 or Physics 242.
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
PHYS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for independent study of specialized topics in 
physics. Senior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
PHYS 470. PHYSICS RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in physics. 
Senior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are required.   
 Semester course, one, two, or three hours. 
 
PHYS 480. INTERNSHIP IN PHYSICS. Selected students participate in individual field 
experiences under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member. 
Requirements include evaluation by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship experience, a final 
written paper, and an oral presentation describing the completed work. Prerequisite: Permission of the 
faculty sponsor and coordination with the internship site. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
PHYS 486. PHYSICS EDUCATION SEMINAR. This seminar assists students in their 
understanding of the basic principles of physics and helps them to learn teaching methods unique to 
physics. Students will discuss modern research-based educational approaches in physics and assist in 
instructing the Science 201 class. Prerequisite: Physics education majors only, or permission of the 
instructor. Semester course, three hours. 
 



Physics / 269 
 

PHYS 488. SEMINAR IN PHYSICS. An opportunity for a student to undertake a project in an area 
of physics of special interest. Project approval and amount of credit to be given requires consent of the 
department. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PHYS 499. HONORS IN PHYSICS RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in 
physics may, with the consent of the Department of Physics, undertake supervised physics research. A 
research paper and a formal presentation are required to receive Honors credit. Not to exceed two hours 
each semester. Semester course, one or two hours. 

ASTRONOMY (ASTR) 
ASTR 206. INTRODUCTION TO SKY MOTIONS AND PLANETS. An introduction to modern 
astronomy with an emphasis on the motions of the sun, moon, and stars in the sky; the solar system; 
and extrasolar planets.  Includes observations with the campus observatory and an observational 
project.  Open to all students. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ASTR 207. INTRODUCTION TO STARS, GALAXIES, AND COSMOLOGY. An introduction 
to modern astronomy with an emphasis on the nature of the universe and objects within it.  Topics 
include the properties of stars, the stellar life cycle, galaxies, and cosmology.  Includes an observational 
project. Open to all students. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
ASTR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in astronomy. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ASTR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
astronomy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ASTR 301. OBSERVATIONAL ASTRONOMY. Methods employed in modern optical 
observational astronomy. Topics covered include spherical trigonometry, time and coordinate systems, 
astronomical instruments, photometry, and spectroscopy. Students make extensive use of the campus 
observatory and the Grove City College observatory near Edinboro, Pennsylvania. Prerequisites: 
Astronomy 206 and 207. Alternate years, fall semester only, four hours. 
 
ASTR 310. INTRODUCTION TO ASTROPHYSICS. A calculus-based introduction to modern 
astrophysics. Topics covered include orbital mechanics, light and matter interactions, stellar 
atmospheres, stellar interiors, stellar evolution, the interstellar medium, the Milky Way, other galaxies, 
and cosmology. Prerequisites: Astronomy 206 and 207; Mathematics 161; Physics 101 or 121; and 
Physics 102 or 122.  Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
ASTR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in astronomy. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ASTR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
astronomy. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ASTR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in astronomy. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
ASTR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
astronomy. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 



270 / Grove City College 

DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL SCIENCE 
Dr. Coulter, Chair; Dr. Kengor, Dr. Stanton, Dr. Verbois. Additional Instructional Faculty: 
Dr. Berry. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science—43 hours 
 Core Requirements (19 hours): 

Political Science 101, 104, 201, 204, 205, and 277. 
Political Science Clusters (12 hours): 

Choose two courses from two of the following clusters for a total of 12 hours: 
American Politics: 

Political Science 304, 305, 306, 308, 309, 317, 318, or 319. 
Comparative/International Relations: 

Political Science 302, 303, 310, 311, 333, 335, 341, 342, or 344. 
Political Theory: 

Political Science 350, 351, 354, 355, 356, or 357. 
Political Science Electives (12 hours): 

Choose twelve additional hours of 300-400 level Political Science electives. Note: 
Completion of Political Science 481 (12 credits) will not fulfill the Political Science 
Electives in full as only six credits of internship may apply toward the major 
requirements. The remaining six credits will count as general elective hours. 
 

Courses that count in the Political Science major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “POLS” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 Effective communication and research skills are indispensable for career advancement 
in the variety of fields available to Political Science majors, including law, government at 
all levels, and business. Thus, the Political Science Department has incorporated 
Information Literacy (IL), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Writing Intensive (WI) instruction 
in Political Science 277. 
 
Recommended electives: 
 Students planning to do graduate work in Political Science are encouraged to acquire 
backgrounds in mathematics and statistics. Courses in computer literacy are also 
recommended. All Ph.D. programs require competency in at least two foreign languages as 
well. Students pursuing law school are advised to take Accounting courses, Business Law, 
Constitutional Law, and Symbolic Logic. A broad background in the social sciences, history, 
and the humanities is also recommended. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Political Science (18 hours) 
 A minor in Political Science will consist of Political Science 104, 201, 204, 205, and 
six hours of Political Science electives. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in National Security Studies (18 hours) 
 A minor in National Security Studies will consist of Political Science 302, 303, 335, 
History 336; and six hours from Political Science 310, 341, 342, 344, History 337, 338, or 
375. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Pre-Law (18 hours) 
 A minor in Pre-Law will consist of Political Science 317, 318 (or History 317, 318); 
Political Science 351 or Philosophy 340; Philosophy 211; and six hours from Accounting 



Political Science / 271 
 

201; Communication Arts 104; Management 303, 304, 308; Philosophy 201; Political 
Science 305, 308; Sociology 233, 331. 
 
  Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

POLITICAL SCIENCE (POLS) 
POLS 101. FOUNDATIONS OF POLITICAL SCIENCE. A review of the principal methods of 
studying politics, the enduring issues of politics, and main institutions of selected governments in the 
world today. Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 104. INTERNATIONAL POLITICS. An analysis of the growth of national states and the 
factors that determine their behavior in international affairs. Particular attention is given to problems 
of collective security, balance of power, foreign policy, and political economy.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 111.  UNDERSTANDING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION.  A study of the origins and 
formation of the US Constitution and essential Constitutional features, such as federalism and 
separation of powers.  Attention will be given to the rights and responsibilities of citizens in the U.S. 
constitutional order.  Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
POLS 201. COMPARATIVE POLITICS. A selective study of major governments of the 
industrialized and non-industrialized world. Emphasis placed on the tools of comparative analysis and 
their application to various nations in the developed and developing world.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 204. AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. A survey of national political institutions 
including Congress, the Supreme Court, the presidency, public bureaucracy, and a review of selected 
topics in public policy. Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 205. POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE CHRISTIAN INTELLECTUAL 
TRADITION. This course introduces students to the study of political philosophy through an 
examination of selected works of political philosophers, theologians, and political actors as those 
works consider the intersection of theology and political life. Semester course, three hours. 
 
 
POLS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in political science. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
political science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 277. RESEARCH METHODS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. An introduction to approaches 
and methods of political science research, with an emphasis on research design, data collection, 
interpretation, and the use of computers in the discipline. This course is taught with a lab. This course 
fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Information Literacy (IL), and Speaking Intensive (SI) 
requirements for the Political Science major. Semester course, four hours. 
 
POLS 302. NATIONAL SECURITY. A review of American national security policy including 
coverage of defense policy, military deployments, and threat assessments.  
 Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 303. GREAT POWER POLITICS. An examination of Great Power Politics with an emphasis 
on twentieth century developments. The course covers the sources of national strength, relations of 



272 / Grove City College 

great powers to one another and minor powers, the rise and decline of nations, and the end of the Cold 
War. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 304. THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY. A study of the major functions of the Presidency, 
with an emphasis on the Office’s historical development and its role in American national government.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 305. AMERICAN CONGRESS. An examination of the major functions and processes of 
Congress, with an emphasis on presidential-congressional relationships and the formation of public 
policy.  Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 306. POLITICAL PARTIES, INTEREST GROUPS, AND ELECTIONS. An overview of 
the functions of American political parties with special attention to the role of interest groups in the 
policy process. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 308. PUBLIC POLICY. A study of the main issues surrounding current topics in public policy, 
dealing with welfare and poverty, energy, environment, labor, business, agriculture, consumer policies, 
and selected issues in foreign policy. Variable credit in election years.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 309. STATE AND LOCAL POLITICS. An examination of state and local governments and 
public policies. Topics include federalism, state constitutions, governors, legislatures, judiciary, 
politics of local governments, and policy debates surrounding local concerns as well as unfunded 
mandates and meeting federal guidelines. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 310. U.S. FOREIGN POLICY. This course offers a general introduction to the traditions and 
theories of the U.S. foreign policy. The course will cover the traditions and theories of U.S. foreign 
policy; processes of policy formulation; and the roles of the President, Congress, the State Department, 
and other government agencies. Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 311. HUMAN RIGHTS. This course is a study of the ideological and theological foundations 
of human rights and the roles of states, international organizations, and non-governmental 
organizations in creating and managing human rights regimes. Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 317. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES I. A study of the development 
of the United States Constitution through use of the case study method. This course especially focuses 
on the constitutional powers of the three branches of government, the relationship between state and 
federal governmental powers, and property rights and economic liberties. Students may not receive 
credit for both Political Science 317 and History 317.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 318. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES II. A study of the 
development of the United States Constitution through the use of the case study method. This course 
especially focuses on the idea of equality and the equal protection clause, due process, privacy and 
liberty rights, freedom of speech, press and religion and other Bill of Rights issues. Students may not 
receive credit for both Political Science 318 and History 318.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 319. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION. A study of the development, operation, and politics of 
administrative agencies and the public bureaucracy. Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 333. MAJOR EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS. A comparative study of European politics 
with special emphasis on the major governments of Western Europe and the emerging republics of the 
former Soviet Union. Problems of European integration and the development of democracy in Eastern 
Europe are stressed. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
 



Political Science / 273 
 

POLS 335. TERRORISM AND COUNTER-TERRORISM. A survey of terrorism from ancient 
times to the present with an emphasis on current international groups like al Qaeda, Hezbollah and 
Hamas, as well as domestic terrorist groups like the Aryan Nations and Ku Klux Klan.   
 Offered periodically, three semester hours. 
 
POLS 341. AFRICAN POLITICS. A comparative overview of the politics of major African states, 
with emphases upon the influences of the colonial past, problems of political development, relations 
with the major powers, the geo-strategic importance of selected countries.  
 Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 342. MIDDLE EASTERN POLITICS. A survey of major powers of the Middle East with 
emphases on problems of the colonial past, political development, tribal and religious influences, 
regional conflicts, and global strategic significance. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 344. ASIAN POLITICS. A study of the major powers of Asia, with special reference to China, 
Japan and Korea, stressing problems of political and economic development, along with regional 
conflicts. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 350. AMERICAN POLITICAL THOUGHT. A survey of the foundations of American 
civilization from the origins of the republic to the present time. Special attention is given to current 
debates surrounding culture wars and their impact on public policy.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 351. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW. This course commonly examines such topics as the nature of 
law, the relationship of law to morality, the problem of judicial interpretation, justice, and rights.  
 Alternate years, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 354. MARXISM. A study of Marxism from its beginnings to its development into twentieth 
century totalitarianism by Lenin and his successors. 
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 355. CLASSICAL POLITICAL THOUGHT. A study of the principle theorists and schools 
of thought about politics from the Pre-Socratics through the Middle Ages.  
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 356. MODERN POLITICAL THOUGHT. A survey of the main political thinkers from 
Machiavelli to the present. The contributions of political theorists to the development of civilization 
are stressed. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
POLS 357. POLITICAL IDEOLOGIES. A survey of modern ideologies including treatments of 
liberalism, conservatism, fascism, communism, democratic socialism, and Third World ideologies. 
Feminism, environmentalism, and related modern ideologies are also covered.  
 Offered periodically, semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Directed research on an individual basis. Junior standing, 
permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
political science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 390. STUDIES IN POLITICS. A focused study of selected topics in politics and political 
science, the content of which varies each semester. Semester course, three hours. 
 
 



274 / Grove City College 

POLS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Directed research on an individual basis. Senior standing, 
permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. 
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
political science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
POLS 480. INTERNSHIP IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. This course offers practical experience in 
the field of politics and political science. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
POLS 481. WASHINGTON INTERNSHIP. This program allows students to spend a semester in 
Washington working in a government office or for a private organization that deals regularly with 
public policy matters. For more information, see the "Washington Internship Program" section under 
General Education and Degree Programs. Semester course, twelve hours. 
 
POLS 488. SEMINAR IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Special topics in political science, the content 
of which varies each semester. Open to majors and non-majors with department approval. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
POLS 499. HONORS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Open only to qualified majors with department 
approval. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL WORK 
Dr. Horton, Chair; Dr. M. E. Bright, Ms. Hollenberger, Dr. K. Homan, Dr. Hosack, Dr. 
Houk, Dr. Throckmorton, Dr. Welton. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Psychology—48 hours 

Core Requirements (26 hours): 
Psychology 101, 201, 204, 208, 301, 310, 316, and 404. 

Psychology Clusters (18 hours): 
Choose two courses from each of the following clusters: 

Experimental:  Psychology 306, 318, or 401. 
Clinical:  Psychology 206, 207, or 312. 
Developmental:  Psychology 209, 211, or 322. 

Major-Related Requirements (4 hours): 
Biology 101 or Science 202. (If Science 202 is taken, the other science course taken 
to fulfill the general science requirement cannot be a Biology course or SCIC 204.) 

 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Psychology—54 hours  
 Core Requirements (42 hours): 

Psychology 101, 201, 204, 208, 301, 310, 316, 318, 319, 401, 404, and nine hours of 
Psychology electives (excluding Psychology 103). 

 Major-Related Requirements (12 hours): 
 Biology 101, 102, and 233. 
 
Courses that count in the Psychology major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “PSYC” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. 
 
 Courses recommended for psychology majors include Philosophy 161 and 201. 
Students are encouraged to take an internship. No credit in independent study or internship 
may be counted toward the major requirements. Those students planning to do graduate 
work in psychology are encouraged to take Psychology 318, 401; Philosophy 161, and 201. 



Psychology and Social Work / 275 
 

 

 Psychology majors, regardless of whether they pursue graduate studies or enter the 
work force immediately following graduation, need to be good writers and speakers and 
need to know how to find, analyze, and use information. To that end, Psychology 204 and 
404 are Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) 
courses, designed to provide the necessary skills for psychology majors to be good 
producers and consumers of psychological information as well as effective communicators 
of that knowledge. 
 
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Social Work—53 hours  

Core Requirements (50 hours): 
Psychology 201, 204; Social Work 101, 205, 264, 280, 302, 305, 310, 342, 364, 382, 
410, 420, 421, 425, and 426. 

Social Work Electives (3 hours): 
One course from Economics 102, Psychology 208, 312, or Sociology 208. 

 
Courses that count in the Social Work major quality point average (MQPA): 
 All courses with “SOCW” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.50 is required by fall of the 
sophomore year or upon acceptance into the Social Work Program and must be maintained 
until graduation. Transfer students and students changing their major after the first semester 
of the sophomore year will be evaluated as part of the application process into the Social 
Work Program. Students on academic probation will be evaluated after one semester and 
will be dismissed from the Social Work program if their MQPA remains below a 2.50. 
 
 SOCW 410 has been designated as the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), 
and Information Literacy (IL) course for Social Work majors. 
 
 The Social Work Program aims to prepare students for competent and compassionate, 
entry-level, generalist social work practice within the broader context of a Christian, liberal 
arts perspective.  The Social Work Program has been accredited by the Council of Social 
Work Education. 
 
Course requirements for a minor in Family Studies (19 hours) 
 A minor in Family Studies will consist of Psychology 201; Sociology 312; one course 
from Psychology 204, Political Science 277, or Sociology 377; and three courses from 
Psychology 209, 211, 322, or Sociology 251. 
 
Course Requirements for a minor in Psychology (18 hours) 
 A minor in Psychology will consist of 18 hours of Psychology courses, including 
Psychology 101, and excluding Psychology 102. Exercise Science 203 Exercise and Sport 
Psychology may also be counted toward the Psychology minor. 
 
Course requirements for a minor in Social Work (21 hours) 
 A minor in Social Work will consist of Social Work 101, 264, 272, 342, 382, and six 
hours from Sociology 203, 208, Social Work 205, 280, 305, or Psychology 312. 
 
 Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses 
recommended to meet requirements for a major. 

 



276 / Grove City College 

PSYCHOLOGY (PSYC) 
PSYC 101. FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE. This course is designed to 
introduce the student to the field of psychology, which is defined as the scientific study of behavior 
and mental processes. Like other sciences, psychology seeks to explain, predict, and control the events 
it studies. Students will be exposed to the important theories, methods, and landmark findings that have 
helped to shape psychology as a field of inquiry. An integral focus of the course will be a consideration 
of how psychology can contribute to the synthesis of a consistent Christian worldview. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 102. EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY. A consideration of those aspects of psychology 
which form the basis for educational methods and their application in the school curriculum, including 
student characteristics, group and individual differences, cognitive and personality development, 
learning theory, measurement, and evaluation. This course satisfies the Information Literacy (IL) 
requirement for all education majors. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 103. LIFESPAN HUMAN GROWTH & DEVELOPMENT. This course will cover human 
development across the lifespan-from conception to end of life. Key theories and research in the 
domains of physical, socio-emotional and cognitive development will be considered. This course is 
designed to meet the needs of students in nursing and other pre-health majors. Psychology majors 
may not receive credit for PSYC 103 toward their major. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 105. PERSPECTIVES ON PSYCHOLOGY. This course is designed to fulfill the foundations 
requirement for students who have taken introductory psychology at another institution. The course 
will focus on the ways in which a Christian worldview impacts the study of psychology. Topics to be 
covered will complement those topics typically covered in the Foundations of Psychological Science 
course emphasizing the integration of Christianity and psychology. This course may not be taken by a 
student who has completed Psychology 101 at Grove City College. Prerequisite: any comparable 
Psychology 101 class taken at another institution. Semester course, one hour. 
 
PSYC 200. CROSS-CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY. A study of the critical and comparative effects 
of cultural and international differences on human psychology. Topics will include cultural 
presuppositions and differences, cognition, emotion, intelligence, testing, motivation, conflict, and 
mental health, with a particular emphasis on human development, social psychology, and conflict.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 201. STATISTICAL METHODS. This course will examine the mathematical reasoning and 
methodology underlying decision-making in the sciences. Students will develop skills in the analysis 
and interpretation of data from scientific experiments, enabling them to be informed consumers of the 
professional literature. Topics will include descriptive statistics, probability theory, and inferential 
statistics. Students may only receive credit for one of Psychology 201, Management 201, or 
Mathematics 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 202. PSYCHOLOGY OF RELIGION. A psychological approach to the understanding of 
religious life with special emphasis on the Judeo-Christian tradition. In addition to traditional areas in 
the psychology of religion (e.g., religious development, measurement of religion and spirituality, 
forgiveness, religious conversion, religious orientation and attitudes, etc.) the course will consider 
issues surrounding the integration of psychology and theology, the innateness of spirituality, the nature 
of the soul or self, the neuroscience of religious experience, and the role of religion and spirituality in 
health. Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 204. RESEARCH METHODS. Introduction to laboratory techniques in psychological 
science. Methods of controlled investigation, use of databases for psychology, evaluation of results 
using SPSS, and writing reports of experiments using APA format will be emphasized. Three lectures 
and two hours of lab per week. This course meets the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the 
Psychology major. Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or Social Work 101, and Psychology 201. 
 Spring semester only, four hours. 



Psychology and Social Work / 277 
 

 

PSYC 206. INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL COUNSELING. An introduction to the 
theories, practices and ethical issues employed in professional counseling. Prerequisites: Psychology 
101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 207. PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONALITY. A study of the major psychological theories of 
personality development and their application to applied psychology. Prerequisite: Psychology 101.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 208. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. The scientific study of the way individuals think, feel, and 
behave under the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. Our study of social psychology will 
investigate the relationship between attitudes and behavior, attribution theory, cultural influences, 
conformity, prejudice, aggression, attraction, altruism, conflict, etc. We will concentrate on applying 
social psychology to real world experiences and will include in-depth analysis of original literature.
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 209. CHILD DEVELOPMENT. This course is a survey of the child development field. 
Students will be encouraged to develop an appreciation for the value of science for understanding 
children and their development. Key theories and research regarding cognition, language, attachment, 
moral reasoning, and the effects of family and peers will be considered. This course is required for all 
Early Childhood and Elementary Education majors. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 211. ADULT DEVELOPMENT AND AGING. Investigation of the psychological, 
biological, and social aspects of early, middle, and late adult development emphasizing both the 
opportunities and limitations of aging. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 214. INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY. The psychology of work and 
organizations. Introduction to the use and application of psychology in the workplace. Prerequisites: 
Psychology 101 and 208. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in psychology. 
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
psychology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are 
required. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 290. STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester, involves the 
examination of different areas of psychology with a focus on new areas not covered in regular 
coursework. Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 301. HISTORY AND SYSTEMS OF PSYCHOLOGY. A study of the philosophical and 
scientific antecedents and trends that have culminated in contemporary psychological science. 
Beginning in the Classical world and moving through the Middle Ages, Renaissance, and the scientific 
revolution of the 16th – 18th centuries, this course will trace how psychology emerged as an independent 
discipline at the end of the 19th century. Significant questions raised by psychology, changing views 
of the soul or self, and how American culture in the 21st century has become a psychological society 
will be considered. Primary works of influential philosophers and scientists will be read. Prerequisite: 
Twelve hours of psychology. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 305. HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY. Health psychology is devoted to understanding 
psychological influences on how people stay healthy, why they become ill, and how they respond when 
they do get ill. This course explores the psychological and social factors that lead to the enhancement 
of health, the prevention and treatment of illness, and the evaluation and modification of health policies 
that influence health care. Prerequisite: Three hours of psychology coursework, excluding Psychology 
201.   Semester course, three hours. 



278 / Grove City College 

PSYC 306. SENSATION AND PERCEPTION. This course covers the physiological basis of 
sensation and the psychological aspects of perception. Vision, audition, the chemical and the cutaneous 
senses are investigated as are the perception of time, music, speech and pain. Prerequisite: Psychology 
101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 310. PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT. This course will include a) an analysis of 
psychometric principles, including reliability, validity, and standardization; b) an analysis of 
intelligence, personality, and interest testing, including in-depth investigation of various tests; and c) 
an analysis of current issues including discrimination in testing. Prerequisites: Psychology 101 and 
201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 312. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY. This course provides an overview of the various 
psychological disorders, as well as theoretical, clinical, and experimental perspectives of the study of 
psychopathology. Emphasis is placed on classification, etiology, assessment and treatment of the major 
disorders. Prerequisites: Psychology 101 and three hours of psychology.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 315. FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY. This course introduces the student to psychological 
research, principles and practice as applied to the legal system. Emphasis will be placed on the interface 
between clinical work and the courts, as well as the psychology of the offender. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 101. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 316. BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE. A study of the biological bases of behavior. 
Neuroanatomy and fundamental principles of neurophysiology and neural communication will be 
covered as will be the physiological mechanisms operating in sensation, emotion, consciousness, 
ingestive behavior, learning and memory, reinforcement, addiction, and psychiatric disorders such as 
schizophrenia. Prerequisite: Psychology 101 or permission of the instructor.  
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 318. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY. A study of human mental processes such as memory, 
reasoning, decision-making, judgment, and social cognition. Included will be a cognitive neuroscience 
perspective on mental processing and the practical implications of these processes in social evaluation, 
culture, and public policy. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 204. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 319. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY LABORATORY. Using computer simulations of 
cognitive psychology methods, students will investigate human mental processes such as memory, 
attention, recognition, decision-making, problem-solving, and social evaluation. Prerequisites: 
Psychology 101, 201 and 204. Semester course, one hour. 
 
PSYC 322. MARRIAGE & FAMILY: ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION. The course 
examines assessment and intervention in marriage and family with an emphasis on marriage. Primary 
sources examining empirically developed and tested approaches will be considered. The focus will be 
on scientific understanding rather than the development of counseling skills. Prerequisite: Psychology 
101; and Psychology 201, Management 201 or Mathematics 201. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 326. PREPARATION FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONS. This course will 
provide an in-depth review of current applications of counseling and psychotherapy tailored for 
students planning to attend graduate school in mental health delivery or employment post-graduation. 
Students will review current theories and trends of mental health service delivery in the United States. 
Principles of professional development will be covered leading to a personal plan of professional 
development for each student. Students will review current ethical and theoretical issues in counseling 
and psychotherapy. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 206, 207. Semester course, three hours. 
 
PSYC 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in psychology. Junior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 



Psychology and Social Work / 279 
 

 

PSYC 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
psychology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 390. STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester, involves the 
examination of different areas of psychology with a focus on new areas not covered in regular 
coursework. Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 401. ADVANCED STATISTICS. An introduction to multivariate statistics by using computer 
statistical packages as applied to social science research including such topics as multiple regression, 
discriminant analysis, factor analysis, multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), path analysis, 
and other frequently used multivariate statistical techniques. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 
204. Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours. 
 
PSYC 404. ADVANCED RESEARCH METHODS. A study of advanced research methods, 
including an independent research project. An IRB proposal, data collection, and formal written and 
oral presentation of the study are required. This course meets the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking 
Intensive (SI) requirements for the psychology major. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 204.
 Semester course, four hours. 
 
PSYC 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in psychology. Senior 
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.  
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in 
psychology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
 Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 
PSYC 480. INTERNSHIP IN PSYCHOLOGY. An opportunity for upper class psychology majors, 
with a minimum of fifteen hours in psychology, to participate in individual field experiences in clinical 
or counseling settings under the professional supervision of the staff of cooperating institutions. 
Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair. Semester course, one to six hours. 
 
PSYC 499. HONORS IN PSYCHOLOGY. Open only to senior psychology majors who have honors 
grades. Application must be made to the department and a proposal for the study approved before 
registering. The student studies under the guidance of department staff and must submit evidence of 
superior achievement. Semester course, one, two or three hours. 

SOCIAL WORK (SOCW) 
SOCW 101. FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL WORK. This foundational course introduces students 
to the rich and diverse discipline of social work and its widespread societal contributions. Students will 
learn the fundamentals of generalist social work; the ethics, tenets, and history of the profession; as 
well as an overview of the social welfare system in America. Examination of prominent social work 
values, philosophical assumptions, and theories occurs throughout the course. Discussions of the 
diverse populations and settings served by social workers are also discussed. Thoughtfully integrating 
the core values of social work and Biblical view of human nature is a particular aim of the course. 
 Semester course, three hours. 
 
SOCW 205. ADMINISTRATION IN SOCIAL WORK. This course introduces students to 
conceptualizing social problems through careful problem analysis and the development of effective 
programmatic responses. Because social service agencies are widely funded through public and private 
grants, students will also be introduced to the process of grant writing. Emphasis is placed throughout 
the course on responding to human need through service that demonstrates compassion, competence, 
and a commitment to promoting human dignity and flourishing. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 



280 / Grove City College 

SOCW 264. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT I. This course provides a 
solid understanding of human behavior and development as it is manifested and developed within 
families, groups, organizations, and communities. The relationships among biological, social, 
psychological, cultural, and spiritual realities are examined for the ways they impact and inform human 
behavior. Discussions of human behavior and development will be specifically targeted to forming a 
solid understanding and foundation for the practice of social work. Prerequisite: Social Work 101. 
 Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 272. SOCIAL WORK PRACTICUM. This practicum will be structured around a 
professional field experience of 140 on-site hours completed at a local organization providing quality 
social services. This experience is a critical component of preparing for a Social Work career. In 
addition to the field experience, students will attend a weekly, one-hour meeting led by a professor 
from the department with the purpose of collectively discussing case scenarios as well as interpersonal 
dynamics with relevance to the development of competent social work practice. Practicum objectives 
include directly observing how professional social work practice is implemented within a specific 
setting, integrating an introductory generalist theory with practice, obtaining knowledge about macro 
social service delivery systems, applying critical thinking skills to specific case situations, and 
demonstrating increased self-awareness related to interest areas within the field of social work. 
Prerequisites: Social Work 101, 264, and 382.  Semester course, three hours. 
 
SOCW 280. INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. This course, designed both for 
students of social work and students of any major interested in issues of international social justice, 
examines the history and development of these problems from micro and macro perspectives, 
exploring the social, political, and economic dynamics that catalyze and perpetuate unjust practices as 
well as the everyday experiences of those directly impacted. A social development model will be 
introduced, as well as case studies and readings from the Global South that encourage students to 
consider cross-cultural perspectives on the efficacy of social development practices. Not solely a 
theoretical examination, the course will encourage students to formulate and integrate ideas grounded 
in knowledge about cross-cultural social work practice, human development, and theology. 
Prerequisite: Social Work 101 and 264. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 302. GENERALIST PRACTICE I. This course introduces the generalist practice model of 
social work including theoretical frameworks, epistemological foundations, values and ethics, and 
practice approaches with individuals and families situated in a diverse range of environments. The 
study of social work functions, knowledge formation, and foundational skills are integral to the course. 
Additionally, the development of micro-level observation, assessment, interviewing, and clinical 
analysis utilizing a problem-solving approach is a primary emphasis. Prerequisites: Social Work 101 
and 264. Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 305. CHILD WELFARE. Children represent a group that is critically important to the future, 
yet also a group without the ability to advocate for themselves. This course will examine child welfare, 
society’s response to providing services for children who lack adequate adult care and nurturing. The 
history, philosophies, programs, policies, and practices which comprise past and current child welfare 
services will be examined for both their efficacy and intended and unintended consequences upon 
some of the most vulnerable persons within our society. Case studies that illustrate the complexities of 
providing ethical and competent child welfare practice will also be integrated into the course. 
Prerequisite: Social Work 101.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 310. GENERALIST PRACTICE II. This course builds upon the preceding course, 
Generalist Practice I, by extending the study of social work theory and practice to task and treatment 
groups and to social service institutions. The course focuses on developing and evaluating the practice 
skills and interventions that are necessary for facilitating effective change within each of these levels. 
A section on case management theory and skills, as well as an introduction to motivational 
interviewing are also included. Special attention will be given to interventions that are particularly 
geared toward individuals on the margins of society including the poor, disabled, elderly, and other at-
risk populations. Prerequisite: Social Work 302. Spring semester only, three hours. 
 



Psychology and Social Work / 281 
 

 

SOCW 342. SOCIAL WELFARE POLICY ANALYSIS. This course carefully analyzes and 
evaluates social welfare policies and programs as responses to defined social problems within their 
historical, political, and economic contexts. Past and present social welfare policies will be evaluated 
from a generalist perspective and students will be encouraged to critically analyze policies for both 
their efficacy and intended and unintended consequences. Policies related to poverty, advocacy, mental 
health, homelessness, racism, and child welfare will be specifically examined for their relevance to the 
practice of social work. Prerequisite: Social Work 101.  Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 364. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT II. This course explores 
the frameworks, values, and skills inherent to meeting micro-level—individual and family—needs 
through an examination of the “mediating layers of society” of our organizations and communities. 
The underlying assumption of the course is there is a reciprocal relationship between individuals and 
families and the larger contexts in which they are situated. Therefore, working for change on any level 
requires an understanding of the full range of social contexts that both positively and negatively affect 
groups of people. This course explores the middle context which lies between that of the individual 
and macro-level social welfare policies. Particular emphasis will be given to exploring ways of 
intervening in society’s middle layers that utilize best practices and promote human flourishing. 
Prerequisites: Social Work 264. Spring only semester, three hours. 
 
SOCW 382. HUMAN DIVERSITY IN SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE. This course highlights the 
ways in which an understanding of human diversity informs all aspects of social work including 
practice and policy. Attention to some of the ways humans are diverse including race and 
socioeconomic status will be carefully examined as they relate to the practice of social work. Case 
studies will also be utilized to explore ways in which individuals and groups are negatively affected 
psychologically, economically, and spiritually by biased or unjust systems and structures. Prerequisite: 
Social Work 101.  Spring semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 410. SOCIAL WORK CAPSTONE. This course requires students to demonstrate integration 
of the courses in the social work major in a final research project. The project entails research into a 
specific social work practice or social welfare policy and involves study design, implementation, 
analysis, and presentation. This course meets the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), 
Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the social work major. Prerequisites: Social Work 101.
 Fall semester only, three hours. 
 
SOCW 420. FIELD PLACEMENT I. In this course, students are placed in social service 
organizations under the supervision of social work practitioners who are “teachers” in the field (field 
instructors) and under the careful guidance of the on-campus faculty. Students do not simply “work” 
in the setting, but are guided by specific learning outcomes. The goals of the field placement experience 
are to link the traditional curriculum with experiential learning through the development of a 
professional self and the development of foundational generalist practice skills with clients and client 
systems. Prerequisites: Senior status and faculty approval.  Fall semester only, four hours. 
 
SOCW 421. FIELD PLACEMENT II. In this course, students are placed in social service 
organizations under the supervision of social work practitioners who are “teachers” in the field (field 
instructors) and under the careful guidance of the on-campus faculty. Students do not simply “work” 
in the setting, but are guided by specific learning outcomes. The goals of the field placement experience 
are to link the traditional curriculum with experiential learning through the development of a 
professional self and the development of foundational generalist practice skills with clients and client 
systems. Prerequisites: Social Work 420.  Spring semester only, four hours. 
 
SOCW 425. FIELD PLACEMENT SEMINAR I. The purpose of the seminar is to collectively 
discuss case scenarios, as well as interpersonal dynamics with relevance to the development of 
competent social work practice. Some of the course seminars will also be topical in nature, covering 
experiential components of social work practice such as confidentiality, boundaries, ethics, integration 
of faith and practice, and professional self-care. Prerequisites: Senior standing and faculty approval. 
 Fall semester only, one hour. 



282 / Grove City College 

 
SOCW 426. FIELD PLACEMENT SEMINAR II. The purpose of the seminar is to collectively 
discuss case scenarios, as well as interpersonal dynamics with relevance to the development of 
competent social work practice. Some of the course seminars will also be topical in nature, covering 
experiential components of social work practice such as confidentiality, boundaries, ethics, integration 
of faith and practice, and professional self-care. Prerequisites: Senior standing and faculty approval. 
 Spring semester only, one hour. 
 
SOCW 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunity for students to do independent study work in a 
specialized area of social work. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty 
sponsor are required.  Semester course, one, two or three hours. 
 

 
 


